For other uses, see Inception (disambiguation). Inception Theatrical release poster Directed by Christopher Nolan Produced by Emma Thomas Christopher Nolan Written by Christopher Nolan Starring Leonardo DiCaprio Ken Watanabe Joseph Gordon-Levitt Marion Cotillard Ellen Page Tom Hardy Cillian Murphy Tom Berenger Michael Caine Music by Hans Zimmer Cinematography Wally Pfister Edited by Lee Smith Production companies Legendary Pictures Syncopy Distributed by Warner Bros. Pictures Release date July 8, 2010 (2010-07-08) (Odeon Leicester Square) July 16, 2010 (2010-07-16) (United Kingdom) July 16, 2010 (2010-07-16) (United States) Running time 148 minutes[1] Country United Kingdom[2] United States[2] Language English Budget $160 million[3] Box office $825.5 million[3] Inception is a 2010 science fiction film written, co-produced, and directed by Christopher Nolan, and co-produced by Emma Thomas. The film stars Leonardo DiCaprio as a professional thief who steals information by infiltrating the subconscious, and is offered a chance to have his criminal history erased as payment for a seemingly impossible task: "inception", the implantation of another person's idea into a target's subconscious.[4] The ensemble cast additionally includes Ellen Page, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Marion Cotillard, Ken Watanabe, Tom Hardy, Dileep Rao, Cillian Murphy, Tom Berenger, and Michael Caine. After the 2002 completion of Insomnia, Nolan presented to Warner Bros. a written 80-page treatment about a horror film envisioning "dream stealers" based on lucid dreaming.[5] Emphasizing on professional-scale experience, Nolan retired the project and instead worked on 2005's Batman Begins, 2006's The Prestige, and The Dark Knight in 2008.[6] The treatment was revised over 6 months and was purchased by Warner in February 2009.[7] Inception was filmed in six countries, beginning in Tokyo in June 19 and ending in Canada in November 22.[8] Its official budget was US$160 million, split between Warner Bros and Legendary.[9] Nolan's reputation and success with The Dark Knight helped secure the film's $100 million in advertising expenditure. Inception's première was held in London on July 8, 2010; its wide release to both conventional and IMAX theaters began on July 16, 2010.[10][11] A box office success, Inception grossed over $800 million worldwide.[3] The home video market also had strong results, with $68 million in DVD and Blu-ray sales. Inception opened to acclaim from critics, who praised its story, score, and ensemble cast.[12] It won four Academy Awards for Best Cinematography, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Visual Effects, and was nominated for four more: Best Picture, Best Original Screenplay, Best Art Direction, and Best Original Score. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Production 3.1 Development 3.2 Locations and sets 3.3 Cinematography 3.4 Visual effects 3.5 Music 4 Themes 4.1 Reality and dreams 4.2 Dreams and cinema 5 Cinematic technique 5.1 Genre 5.2 Ending 6 Release 6.1 Marketing 6.2 Home media 6.3 Putative video game 7 Reception 7.1 Box office 7.2 Critical reception 7.3 Top ten lists 7.4 Accolades 8 In popular culture 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Plot Dominic "Dom" Cobb (Leonardo DiCaprio) and Arthur (Joseph Gordon-Levitt) are "extractors", who perform corporate espionage using an experimental military technology to infiltrate the subconscious of their targets and extract valuable information through a shared dream world. Their latest target, Japanese businessman Saito (Ken Watanabe), reveals that he arranged their mission himself to test Cobb for a seemingly-impossible job: planting an idea in a person's subconscious, or "inception". To break up the energy conglomerate of ailing competitor Maurice Fischer (Pete Postlethwaite), Saito wants Cobb to convince Fischer's son and heir, Robert (Cillian Murphy), to dissolve his father's company. In return, Saito promises to use his influence to clear Cobb of a murder charge, allowing Cobb to return home to his children. Cobb accepts the offer and assembles his team: Eames (Tom Hardy), a conman and identity forger; Yusuf (Dileep Rao), a chemist who concocts a powerful sedative for a stable "dream within a dream" strategy; and Ariadne (Ellen Page), an architecture student tasked with designing the labyrinth of the dream landscapes, recruited with the help of Cobb's father-in-law, Professor Stephen Miles (Michael Caine). While dream-sharing with Cobb, Ariadne learns his subconscious houses an invasive projection of his late wife Mal (Marion Cotillard). When the elder Fischer dies in Sydney, Robert Fischer accompanies the body on a ten-hour flight back to Los Angeles, which the team (including Saito, who wants to verify their success) uses as an opportunity to sedate and take Fischer into a shared dream. At each dream level, the person generating the dream stays behind to set up a "kick" that will be used to awaken the other sleeping team members from the deeper dream level; to be successful, these kicks must occur simultaneously at each dream level, a fact complicated due to the nature of time which proceeds much faster in each successive level. The first level is Yusuf's dream of a rainy Los Angeles. The team abducts Fischer, but they are attacked by armed projections from Fischer's subconscious, which has been trained to defend against extraction. The team takes Fischer and a wounded Saito to a warehouse, where Cobb reveals that while dying in the dream would normally wake Saito up, the powerful sedatives needed to stabilize the multi-level dream will instead send a dying dreamer into "limbo", a world of infinite subconscious from which escape is difficult and a dreamer risks forgetting they are in a dream. Despite these setbacks, the team continues with the mission. Eames impersonates Fischer's godfather, Peter Browning (Tom Berenger), to suggest Fischer reconsider his father's will. Yusuf drives the van as the other dreamers are sedated into the second level. In the second level, a hotel dreamed by Arthur, Cobb convinces Fischer that he has been kidnapped by Browning and Cobb is his subconscious protector. Cobb persuades him to go down another level to explore Browning's subconscious (in reality, it is a ruse to enter Fischer's). The third level is a fortified hospital on a snowy mountain dreamed by Eames. The team has to infiltrate it and hold off the guards as Cobb takes Fischer into the equivalent of his subconscious. Yusuf, under pursuit by Fischer's projections in the first level, deliberately drives off a bridge and initiates his kick too soon. This removes the gravity of Arthur's level, forcing him to improvise a new kick that will synchronize with the van hitting the water, and causes an avalanche in Eames' level. Mal's projection emerges and kills Fischer, Cobb kills Mal, and Saito succumbs to his wounds; all three fall into Limbo. While Eames sets up a kick by rigging the hospital with explosives, Cobb and Ariadne enter Limbo to rescue Fischer and Saito. Cobb reveals to Ariadne that he and Mal went to Limbo while experimenting with the dream-sharing technology. Sedated for a few hours of real time, they spent fifty years in dream time constructing a world from their shared memories. When Mal refused to return to reality, Cobb used a rudimentary form of inception by reactivating her totem (an object dreamers use to distinguish dreams from reality) and reminding her subconscious that their world was not real. However, when she woke up, Mal was still convinced that she was dreaming. In an attempt to "wake up" for real, Mal committed suicide and framed Cobb for her death to force him to do the same. Facing a murder charge, Cobb fled the U.S., leaving his children in the care of Professor Miles. Through his confession, Cobb makes peace with his guilt over Mal's death. Ariadne kills Mal's projection and wakes Fischer up with a kick. Revived at the mountain hospital, Fischer enters a safe room to discover and accept the planted idea: a projection of his dying father telling him to be his own man. While Cobb remains in Limbo to search for Saito, the other team members ride the synchronized kicks back to reality. Cobb eventually finds an aged Saito in Limbo and reminds him of their agreement. The dreamers all awaken on the plane and Saito makes a phone call. Upon arrival at Los Angeles Airport, Cobb passes the U.S. immigration checkpoint and Professor Miles accompanies him to his home. Cobb tests reality using his totem, a spinning top that spins indefinitely in a dream world, but ignores its result and instead joins his children in the garden. Cast The cast at a premiere for the film in July 2010: From left to right: Cillian Murphy, Marion Cotillard, Joseph Gordon-Levitt, Ellen Page, Ken Watanabe, Michael Caine, and Leonardo DiCaprio Leonardo DiCaprio as Dom Cobb, a professional thief who specializes in conning secrets from his victims by infiltrating their dreams. DiCaprio was the first actor to be cast in the film.[13] Nolan had been trying to work with the actor for years and met him several times, but was unable to convince him to appear in any of his films until Inception.[14] Both Brad Pitt and Will Smith were offered the role, according to The Hollywood Reporter.[15] Cobb's role is compared to "the haunted widower in a Gothic romance".[16] Joseph Gordon-Levitt as Arthur, Cobb's partner who manages and researches the missions. Gordon-Levitt compared Arthur to the producer of Cobb's art, "the one saying, 'Okay, you have your vision; now I'm going to figure out how to make all the nuts and bolts work so you can do your thing'".[17] The actor did all of his stunts but one scene and said the preparation "was a challenge and it would have to be for it to look real".[18] James Franco was in talks with Christopher Nolan to play Arthur, but was ultimately unavailable due to scheduling conflicts.[19] Ellen Page as Ariadne, a graduate student of architecture who is recruited to construct the various dreamscapes, which are described as mazes. The name Ariadne alludes to a princess of Greek myth, daughter of King Minos, who aided the hero Theseus by giving him a sword and a ball of string to help him navigate the labyrinth which was the prison of the Minotaur. Nolan said that Page was chosen for being a "perfect combination of freshness and savvy and maturity beyond her years".[20] Page said her character acts as a proxy to the audience, as "she's just learning about these ideas and, in essence, assists the audience in learning about dream sharing".[21] Evan Rachel Wood was Christopher Nolan's first choice to play Ariadne, but she turned it down. Before Ellen Page was offered and accepted the role, Nolan considered casting Emily Blunt, Rachel McAdams, Taylor Swift, Emma Roberts, Jessy Schram, and Carey Mulligan.[citation needed] Tom Hardy as Eames, a sharp-tongued associate of Cobb. He is referred to as a fence but his specialty is forgery, more accurately identity theft. Eames uses his ability to impersonate others inside the dream world in order to manipulate Fischer. Hardy described his character as "an old, Graham Greene-type diplomat; sort of faded, shabby, grandeur – the old Shakespeare lovey mixed with somebody from Her Majesty's Special Forces", who wears "campy, old money" costumes.[22] Ken Watanabe as Mr. Saito, a Japanese businessman who employs Cobb for the team's mission. Nolan wrote the role with Watanabe in mind, as he wanted to work with him again after Batman Begins.[23] Inception is Watanabe's first work in a contemporary setting where his primary language is English. Watanabe tried to emphasize a different characteristic of Saito in every dream level: "First chapter in my castle, I pick up some hidden feelings of the cycle. It's magical, powerful and then the first dream. And back to the second chapter, in the old hotel, I pick up [being] sharp and more calm and smart and it's a little bit [of a] different process to make up the character of any movie".[24] Dileep Rao as Yusuf. Rao describes Yusuf as "an avant-garde pharmacologist, who is a resource for people, like Cobb, who want to do this work unsupervised, unregistered and unapproved of by anyone". Co-producer Jordan Goldberg said the role of the chemist was "particularly tough because you don't want him to seem like some kind of drug dealer", and that Rao was cast for being "funny, interesting and obviously smart".[25] Cillian Murphy as Robert Michael Fischer, the heir to a business empire and the team's target.[23] Murphy said Fischer was portrayed as "a petulant child who's in need of a lot of attention from his father, he has everything he could ever want materially, but he's deeply lacking emotionally". The actor also researched the sons of Rupert Murdoch, "to add to that the idea of living in the shadow of someone so immensely powerful".[26] Tom Berenger as Peter Browning, Robert Fischer's godfather and fellow executive at the Fischers' company.[27] Berenger said Browning acts as a "surrogate father" to Robert, who calls the character "Uncle Peter", and emphasized that "Browning has been with [Robert] his whole life and has probably spent more quality time with him than his own father".[25] Marion Cotillard as Mal Cobb, Dom's deceased wife. She is a manifestation of Dom's guilt about the real cause of Mal's suicide. He is unable to control these projections of her, challenging his abilities as an extractor.[14] Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale," and DiCaprio praised Cotillard's performance saying that "she can be strong and vulnerable and hopeful and heartbreaking all in the same moment, which was perfect for all the contradictions of her character".[28] Pete Postlethwaite as Maurice Fischer, Robert Fischer's father and the dying founder of a business empire. Michael Caine as Professor Stephen Miles, Cobb's mentor and father-in-law,[25] and Ariadne's college professor who recommends her to the team.[29] Lukas Haas as Nash, an architect in Cobb's employment who betrays the team and is later replaced by Ariadne.[30] Talulah Riley as a woman whom Eames disguises himself as in a dream. Riley liked the role, despite it being minimal: "I get to wear a nice dress, pick up men in bars, and shove them in elevators. It was good to do something adultish. Usually I play 15-year-old English schoolgirls."[31] Production Development Emma Thomas and Christopher Nolan answer questions about Inception. The husband and wife team produced the film through their company Syncopy Films. Nolan also wrote and directed it. Initially, Nolan wrote an 80-page treatment about dream-stealers.[5] Originally, Nolan had envisioned Inception as a horror film,[5] but eventually wrote it as a heist film even though he found that "traditionally [they] are very deliberately superficial in emotional terms."[32] Upon revisiting his script, he decided that basing it in that genre did not work because the story "relies so heavily on the idea of the interior state, the idea of dream and memory. I realized I needed to raise the emotional stakes."[32] Nolan worked on the script for nine to ten years.[13] When he first started thinking about making the film, Nolan was influenced by "that era of movies where you had The Matrix (1999), you had Dark City (1998), you had The Thirteenth Floor (1999) and, to a certain extent, you had Memento (2000), too. They were based in the principles that the world around you might not be real."[32][33] Nolan first pitched the film to Warner Bros. in 2001, but then felt that he needed more experience making large-scale films, and embarked on Batman Begins and The Dark Knight.[6] He soon realized that a film like Inception needed a large budget because "as soon as you're talking about dreams, the potential of the human mind is infinite. And so the scale of the film has to feel infinite. It has to feel like you could go anywhere by the end of the film. And it has to work on a massive scale."[6] After making The Dark Knight, Nolan decided to make Inception and spent six months completing the script.[6] Nolan states that the key to completing the script was wondering what would happen if several people shared the same dream. "Once you remove the privacy, you've created an infinite number of alternative universes in which people can meaningfully interact, with validity, with weight, with dramatic consequences."[34] Leonardo DiCaprio was the first actor to be cast in the film.[13] Nolan had been trying to work with the actor for years and met him several times, but was unable to convince him to appear in any of his films until Inception. DiCaprio finally agreed because he was "intrigued by this concept—this dream-heist notion and how this character's going to unlock his dreamworld and ultimately affect his real life."[35] He read the script and found it to be "very well written, comprehensive but you really had to have Chris in person, to try to articulate some of the things that have been swirling around his head for the last eight years."[6] DiCaprio and Nolan spent months talking about the screenplay. Nolan took a long time re-writing the script in order "to make sure that the emotional journey of his character was the driving force of the movie."[13] On February 11, 2009, it was announced that Warner Bros. purchased Inception, a spec script written by Nolan.[7] Locations and sets Principal photography began in Tokyo on June 19, 2009, with the scene where Saito first hires Cobb during a helicopter flight over the city.[5][36] The production moved to the United Kingdom and shot in a converted airship hangar in Cardington, Bedfordshire, north of London.[37] There, the hotel bar set which tilted 30 degrees was built.[38] A hotel corridor was also constructed by Guy Hendrix Dyas, the production designer, Chris Corbould, the special effects supervisor, and Wally Pfister, the director of photography; it rotated a full 360 degrees to create the effect of alternate directions of gravity for scenes set during the second level of dreaming, where dream-sector physics become chaotic. The idea was inspired by a technique used in Stanley Kubrick's 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968). Nolan said, "I was interested in taking those ideas, techniques, and philosophies and applying them to an action scenario".[39] The filmmakers originally planned to make the hallway only 40 ft (12 m) long, but as the action sequence became more elaborate, the hallway's length grew to 100 ft (30 m). The corridor was suspended along eight large concentric rings that were spaced equidistantly outside its walls and powered by two massive electric motors.[37] Joseph Gordon-Levitt, who plays Arthur, spent several weeks learning to fight in a corridor that spun like "a giant hamster wheel".[32] Nolan said of the device, "It was like some incredible torture device; we thrashed Joseph for weeks, but in the end we looked at the footage, and it looks unlike anything any of us has seen before. The rhythm of it is unique, and when you watch it, even if you know how it was done, it confuses your perceptions. It's unsettling in a wonderful way".[32] Gordon-Levitt remembered, "it was six-day weeks of just, like, coming home at night battered ... The light fixtures on the ceiling are coming around on the floor, and you have to choose the right time to cross through them, and if you don't, you're going to fall."[40] On July 15, 2009, filming took place at University College London for the sequences occurring inside a Paris college of architecture in the story,[5] including the library, Flaxman Gallery and Gustav Tuck Theatre.[41] Filming moved to France where they shot Cobb entering the college of architecture (the place used for the entrance was the Musée Galliera) and the pivotal scenes between Ariadne and Cobb, in a bistro (a fictional one set up at the corner of Rue César Franck and Rue Bouchut) and then on the Bir-Hakeim bridge.[42] For the explosion that takes place during the bistro scene, the local authorities would not allow the actual use of explosives. High-pressure nitrogen was used to create the effect of a series of explosions. Pfister used six high-speed cameras to capture the sequence from different angles and make sure that they got the shot. The visual effects department then enhanced the sequence, adding more destruction and flying debris. For the "Paris folding" sequence and when Ariadne "creates" the bridges, green screen and CGI were used on location.[42] Tangier, Morocco, doubled as Mombasa, where Cobb hires Eames and Yusuf. A foot chase was shot in the streets and alleyways of the historic medina quarter.[43] To capture this sequence, Pfister employed a mix of hand-held camera and steadicam work.[44] Tangier was also used to film an important riot scene during the initial foray into Saito's mind. Filming moved to the Los Angeles area, where some sets were built on a Warner Bros. sound stage, including the interior rooms of Saito's Japanese castle (the exterior was done on a small set built in Malibu beach). The dining room was inspired by the Nijo Castle built around 1603. These sets were inspired by a mix of Japanese architecture and Western influences.[44] The production also staged a multi-vehicle car chase on the streets of downtown Los Angeles, which involved a freight train crashing down the middle of a street.[45] To do this, the filmmakers configured a train engine on the chassis of a tractor trailer. The replica was made from fiberglass molds taken from authentic train parts and then matched in terms of color and design.[46] Also, the car chase was supposed to be set in the midst of a downpour but the L.A. weather stayed typically sunny. The filmmakers were forced to set up elaborate effects (e.g., rooftop water cannons) to give the audience the impression that the weather was overcast and soggy. L.A. was also the site of the climactic scene where a Ford Econoline van flies off the Schuyler Heim Bridge in slow motion.[47] This sequence was filmed on and off for months with the van being shot out of a cannon, according to actor Dileep Rao. Capturing the actors suspended within the van in slow motion took a whole day to film. Once the van landed in the water, the challenge for the actors was not to panic. "And when they ask you to act, it's a bit of an ask," explained Cillian Murphy.[47] The actors had to be underwater for four to five minutes while drawing air from scuba tanks; underwater buddy breathing is shown in this sequence.[47] Cobb's house was in Pasadena. The hotel lobby was filmed at the CAA building in Century City. Limbo was made on location in Los Angeles and Morocco with the beach scene filmed at Palos Verdes beach with CGI buildings. N Hope St. in Los Angeles was the primary filming location for Limbo, with green screen and CGI being used to create the dream landscape. The final phase of principal photography took place in Alberta in late November 2009. The location manager discovered a temporarily closed ski resort, Fortress Mountain.[48] An elaborate set was assembled near the top station of the Canadian chairlift, taking three months to build.[49] The production had to wait for a huge snowstorm, which eventually arrived.[5] The ski-chase sequence was inspired by Nolan's favorite James Bond film, On Her Majesty's Secret Service (1969): "What I liked about it that we've tried to emulate in this film is there's a tremendous balance in that movie of action and scale and romanticism and tragedy and emotion."[50] Cinematography The film was shot primarily in the anamorphic format on 35 mm film, with key sequences filmed on 65 mm, and aerial sequences in VistaVision. Nolan did not shoot any footage with IMAX cameras as he had with The Dark Knight. "We didn't feel that we were going to be able to shoot in IMAX because of the size of the cameras because this film given that it deals with a potentially surreal area, the nature of dreams and so forth, I wanted it to be as realistic as possible. Not be bound by the scale of those IMAX cameras, even though I love the format dearly".[13] In addition Nolan and Pfister tested using Showscan and Super Dimension 70 as potential large format high frame rate camera systems to use for the film, but ultimately decided against either format.[38] Sequences in slow motion were filmed on a Photo-Sonics 35mm camera at speeds of up to 1000 frames per second. Wally Pfister tested shooting some of these sequences using a high speed digital camera, but found the format to be too unreliable due to technical glitches. "Out of six times that we shot on the digital format, we only had one useable piece and it didn't end up in the film. Out of the six times we shot with the Photo-Sonics camera and 35mm running through it, every single shot was in the movie."[51] Nolan also chose not to shoot any of the film in 3D as he prefers shooting on film[13] using prime lenses, which is not possible with 3D cameras.[52] Nolan has also criticized the dim image that 3D projection produces, and disputes that traditional film does not allow realistic depth perception, saying "I think it's a misnomer to call it 3D versus 2D. The whole point of cinematic imagery is it's three dimensional... You know 95% of our depth cues come from occlusion, resolution, color and so forth, so the idea of calling a 2D movie a '2D movie' is a little misleading."[53] Nolan did test converting Inception into 3D in post-production but decided that, while it was possible, he lacked the time to complete the conversion to a standard he was happy with.[5][53] In February 2011 Jonathan Liebesman suggested that Warner Bros were attempting a 3D conversion for Blu-ray release.[54] Wally Pfister gave each location and dream level a distinctive look to aid the audience's recognition of the narrative's location during the heavily crosscut portion of the film: the mountain fortress appears sterile and cool, the hotel hallways have warm hues, and the scenes in the van are more neutral.[55] Nolan has said that the film "deals with levels of reality, and perceptions of reality which is something I'm very interested in. It's an action film set in a contemporary world, but with a slight science-fiction bent to it," while also describing it as "very much an ensemble film structured somewhat as a heist movie. It's an action adventure that spans the globe".[56] Visual effects For dream sequences in Inception, Nolan used little computer-generated imagery, preferring practical effects whenever possible. Nolan said, "It's always very important to me to do as much as possible in-camera, and then, if necessary, computer graphics are very useful to build on or enhance what you have achieved physically."[57] To this end, visual effects supervisor Paul Franklin built a miniature of the mountain fortress set and then blew it up for the film. For the fight scene that takes place in zero gravity, he used CG-based effects to "subtly bend elements like physics, space and time."[58] The most challenging effect was the "limbo" city level at the end of the film because it continually developed during production. Franklin had artists build concepts while Nolan gave his ideal vision: "Something glacial, with clear modernist architecture, but with chunks of it breaking off into the sea like icebergs".[58] Franklin and his team ended up with "something that looked like an iceberg version of Gotham City with water running through it."[58] They created a basic model of a glacier and then designers created a program that added elements like roads, intersections and ravines until they had a complex, yet organic-looking, cityscape. For the Paris-folding sequence, Franklin had artists producing concept sketches and then they created rough computer animations to give them an idea of what the sequence looked like while in motion. Later during principal photography, Nolan was able to direct Leonardo DiCaprio and Ellen Page based on this rough computer animation Franklin had created. Inception had close to 500 visual effects shots (in comparison, Batman Begins had approximately 620) which is considered minor in comparison to contemporary visual effects epics that can have around 1,500 or 2,000 special effects images.[58] Music Main article: Inception: Music from the Motion Picture The score for Inception was written by Hans Zimmer,[27] who described his work as "a very electronic,[59] dense score",[60] filled with "nostalgia and sadness" to match Cobb's feelings throughout the film.[61] The music was written simultaneously to filming,[60] and features a guitar sound reminiscent of Ennio Morricone, played by Johnny Marr, former guitarist of The Smiths. Édith Piaf's "Non, je ne regrette rien" ("No, I Do Not Regret Anything") pointedly appears throughout the film, used to accurately time the dreams, and Zimmer reworked pieces of the song into cues of the score.[61] A soundtrack album was released on July 11, 2010 by Reprise Records.[62] The majority of the score was also included in high resolution 5.1 surround sound on the second disc of the 2 disc Blu-ray release [63] Hans Zimmer's music was nominated for an Academy Award in the Best Original Score category in 2011, losing to Trent Reznor and Atticus Ross of The Social Network.[64] Themes Reality and dreams Penrose stairs are incorporated into the film as an example of the impossible objects that can be created in lucid dream worlds. In Inception, Nolan wanted to explore "the idea of people sharing a dream space...That gives you the ability to access somebody's unconscious mind. What would that be used and abused for?"[13] The majority of the film's plot takes place in these interconnected dream worlds. This structure creates a framework where actions in the real or dream worlds ripple across others. The dream is always in a state of production, and shifts across the levels as the characters navigate it.[65] By contrast, the world of The Matrix (1999) is an authoritarian, computer-controlled one, alluding to theories of social control developed by Michel Foucault and Jean Baudrillard. Nolan's world has more in common with the works of Gilles Deleuze and Félix Guattari.[65] David Denby in The New Yorker compared Nolan's cinematic treatment of dreams to Luis Buñuel's in Belle de Jour (1967) and The Discreet Charm of the Bourgeoisie (1972).[66] He criticized Nolan's "literal-minded" action level sequencing compared to Buñuel, who "silently pushed us into reveries and left us alone to enjoy our wonderment, but Nolan is working on so many levels of representation at once that he has to lay in pages of dialogue just to explain what's going on." The latter captures "the peculiar malign intensity of actual dreams."[66] Deirdre Barrett, a dream researcher at Harvard University, said that Nolan did not get every detail accurate regarding dreams, but their illogical, rambling, disjointed plots would not make for a great thriller anyway. However, "he did get many aspects right," she said, citing the scene in which a sleeping Cobb is shoved into a full bath, and in the dream world water gushes into the windows of the building, waking him up. "That's very much how real stimuli get incorporated, and you very often wake up right after that intrusion".[67] Nolan himself said, "I tried to work that idea of manipulation and management of a conscious dream being a skill that these people have. Really the script is based on those common, very basic experiences and concepts, and where can those take you? And the only outlandish idea that the film presents, really, is the existence of a technology that allows you to enter and share the same dream as someone else."[32] Dreams and cinema Others have argued that the film is itself a metaphor for filmmaking, and that the filmgoing experience itself, images flashing before one's eyes in a darkened room, is akin to a dream. Writing in Wired, Jonah Lehrer supported this interpretation and presented neurological evidence that brain activity is strikingly similar during film-watching and sleeping. In both, the visual cortex is highly active and the prefrontal cortex, which deals with logic, deliberate analysis, and self-awareness, is quiet.[68] Paul argued that the experience of going to a picturehouse is itself an exercise in shared dreaming, particularly when viewing Inception: the film's sharp cutting between scenes forces the viewer to create larger narrative arcs to stitch the pieces together. This demand of production parallel to consumption of the images, on the part of the audience is analogous to dreaming itself. As in the film's story, in a cinema one enters into the space of another's dream, in this case Nolan's, as with any work of art, one's reading of it is ultimately influenced by one's own subjective desires and subconscious.[65] At Bir-Hakeim bridge in Paris, Ariadne creates an illusion of infinity by adding facing mirrors underneath its struts, Stephanie Dreyfus in la Croix asked "Is this not a strong, beautiful metaphor for the cinema and its power of illusion?"[69] Cinematic technique Genre Nolan combined elements from several different film genres into the film, notably science fiction, heist film, and film noir. Marion Cotillard plays "Mal" Cobb, Dom Cobb's projection of his guilt over his deceased wife's suicide. As the film's main antagonist, she is a frequent, malevolent presence in his dreams. Dom is unable to control these projections of her, challenging his abilities as an extractor.[14] Nolan described Mal as "the essence of the femme fatale",[70] the key noir reference in the film. As a "classic femme fatale" her relationship with Cobb is in his mind, a manifestation of Cobb's own neurosis and fear of how little he knows about the woman he loves.[71] DiCaprio praised Cotillard's performance saying that "she can be strong and vulnerable and hopeful and heartbreaking all in the same moment, which was perfect for all the contradictions of her character".[23] Nolan began with the structure of a heist movie, since exposition is an essential element of that genre, though adapted it to have a greater emotional narrative suited to the world of dreams and subconscious.[71] Or, as Denby surmised, "the outer shell of the story is an elaborate caper".[66] Kristin Thompson argued that exposition was a major formal device in the film. While a traditional heist movie has a heavy dose of exposition at the beginning as the team assembles and the leader explains the plan, in Inception this becomes nearly continuous as the group progresses through the various levels of dreaming.[72] Three-quarters of the film, until the van begins to fall from the bridge, are devoted to explaining its plot. In this way, exposition takes precedence over characterisation. Their relationships are created by their respective skills and roles. Ariadne, like her ancient namesake, creates the maze and guides the others through it, but also helps Cobb navigate his own subconscious, and as the sole student of dream sharing, helps the audience understand the concept of the plot.[73] Nolan drew inspiration from the works of Jorge Luis Borges,[5][74] the anime film Paprika (2006) by Satoshi Kon as an influence on the character "Ariadne", and Blade Runner (1982) by Ridley Scott.[75] Ending The film cuts to the closing credits from a shot of the top apparently starting to show an ever so faint wobble, inviting speculation about whether the final sequence was reality or another dream. Nolan confirmed that the ambiguity was deliberate,[71] saying, "I've been asked the question more times than I've ever been asked any other question about any other film I've made... What's funny to me is that people really do expect me to answer it."[76] The film's script concludes with "Behind him, on the table, the spinning top is STILL SPINNING. And we – FADE OUT".[77] Nolan said, "I put that cut there at the end, imposing an ambiguity from outside the film. That always felt the right ending to me — it always felt like the appropriate 'kick' to me... The real point of the scene — and this is what I tell people — is that Cobb isn't looking at the top. He's looking at his kids. He's left it behind. That's the emotional significance of the thing."[76] Also, Michael Caine explained his interpretation of the ending, saying, "If I'm there it's real, because I'm never in the dream. I'm the guy who invented the dream."[78] Some pundits have argued that the top was not in fact Cobb's totem, rendering the discussion irrelevant. They say that the top was Mal's totem; Cobb's was his wedding ring, as he can be seen wearing it whenever he is in a dream and without it whenever he isn't. As he hands his passport to the immigration officer, his hand is shown with no ring; thus he was conclusively in reality when seeing his children. Furthermore, the children were portrayed by different actors, indicating they had aged.[79][80] Mark Fisher argued that "a century of cultural theory" cautions against accepting the author's interpretation as anything more than a supplementary text, and this all the more so given the theme of the instability of any one master position in Nolan's films. Therein the manipulator is often the one who ends up manipulated and Cobb's "not caring" about whether or not his world is real may be the price of happiness and release.[81] Release Marketing Warner Bros. spent $100 million marketing the film. Although Inception was not part of an existing franchise, Sue Kroll, president of Warner's worldwide marketing, said the company believed it could gain awareness due to the strength of "Christopher Nolan as a brand". Kroll declared that "We don't have the brand equity that usually drives a big summer opening, but we have a great cast and a fresh idea from a filmmaker with a track record of making incredible movies. If you can't make those elements work, it's a sad day."[82] The studio also tried to maintain a campaign of secrecy—as reported by the Senior VP of Interactive Marketing, Michael Tritter, "You have this movie which is going to have a pretty big built in fanbase... but you also have a movie that you are trying to keep very secret. Chris [Nolan] really likes people to see his movies in a theater and not see it all beforehand so everything that you do to market that—at least early on—is with an eye to feeding the interest to fans."[83] A viral marketing campaign was employed for the film. After the revelation of the first teaser trailer, in August 2009, the film's official website featured only an animation of Cobb's spinning top. In December, the top toppled over and the website opened the online game Mind Crime, which upon completion revealed Inception's poster.[84] The rest of the campaign unrolled after WonderCon in April 2010, where Warner gave away promotional T-shirts featuring the PASIV briefcase used to create the dream space, and had a QR code linking to an online manual of the device.[85] Mind Crime also received a stage 2 with more resources, including a hidden trailer for the movie.[86] More pieces of viral marketing began to surface before Inception's release, such as a manual filled with bizarre images and text sent to Wired magazine,[87] and the online publication of posters, ads, phone applications, and strange websites all related to the film.[88][89] Warner also released an online prequel comic, Inception: The Cobol Job.[90] The official trailer released on May 10, 2010 through Mind Game was extremely well received.[86] It featured an original piece of music, "Mind Heist", by recording artist Zack Hemsey,[91] rather than music from the score.[92] The trailer quickly went viral with numerous mashups copying its style, both by amateurs on sites like YouTube[93] and by professionals on sites such as CollegeHumor.[94][95] On June 7, 2010, a behind-the-scenes featurette on the film was released in HD on Yahoo! Movies.[96] Home media Inception was released on DVD and Blu-ray on December 3, 2010, in France,[97] and the week after in the UK and USA (December 7, 2010).[98][99] Warner Bros. also made available in the United States a limited Blu-ray edition packaged in a metal replica of the PASIV briefcase, which included extras such as a metal replica of the spinning top totem. With a production run of less than 2000, it sold out in one weekend.[100] Putative video game In a November 2010 interview, Nolan expressed his intention to develop a video game set in the Inception world, working with a team of collaborators. He described it as "a longer-term proposition", referring to the medium of video games as "something I've wanted to explore".[101] Reception Box office Film Release date Box office revenue Box office ranking Budget Reference United States North America International Worldwide All-time United States All-time worldwide Inception July 2010 $292,576,195 $532,956,569 $825,532,764 No. 55 No. 44 $160,000,000 [102] Inception was released in both conventional and IMAX theaters on July 16, 2010.[103][104] The film had its world premiere at Leicester Square in London, United Kingdom on July 8, 2010.[105] In the United States and Canada, Inception was released theatrically in 3,792 conventional theaters and 195 IMAX theaters.[103] The film grossed $21.8 million during its opening day on July 16, 2010, with midnight screenings in 1,500 locations.[106] Overall the film made $62.7 million and debuted at No.1 on its opening weekend.[107] Inception's opening weekend gross made it the second-highest-grossing debut for a science-fiction film that was not a sequel, remake or adaptation, behind Avatar's $77 million opening weekend gross in 2009.[107] The film held the top spot of the box office rankings in its second and third weekends, with drops of just 32% ($42.7 million) and 36% ($27.5 million) respectively,[108][109] before dropping to second place in its fourth week, behind The Other Guys.[110] Inception grossed US$292 million in the United States and Canada, US$56 million in the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta and US$475 million in other countries for a total of $823 million worldwide.[3] Its five highest-grossing markets after the USA and Canada (US$292) were China (US$68million), the United Kingdom, Ireland and Malta (US$56 million), France and the Maghreb region (US$43 million), Japan (US$40 million) and South Korea (US$38 million).[111] It was the sixth-highest-grossing film of 2010 in North America,[112] and the fourth-highest internationally, behind Toy Story 3, Alice in Wonderland and Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows - Part 1.[113] The film currently stands as the 44th-highest-grossing of all time.[114] Inception is the third most lucrative production in Christopher Nolan's career—behind The Dark Knight and The Dark Knight Rises[115]— and the second most for Leonardo DiCaprio—behind Titanic.[116] Critical reception Rotten Tomatoes gave the film a score of 86% based on reviews from 331 critics, with an average score of 8.1/10. The website offers the consensus: "Smart, innovative, and thrilling, Inception is that rare summer blockbuster that succeeds viscerally as well as intellectually."[117] Metacritic, another review aggregator, assigned the film a weighted average score of 74 (out of 100) based on 42 reviews from mainstream critics, considered to be "generally favorable reviews."[118] In polls conducted by CinemaScore during the opening weekend cinemagoers gave Inception an average score of "B+".[119] Rolling Stone magazine's Peter Travers called Inception a "wildly ingenious chess game," and concluded "the result is a knockout."[120] In Variety, Justin Chang praised the film as "a conceptual tour de force" and wrote, "applying a vivid sense of procedural detail to a fiendishly intricate yarn set in the labyrinth of the unconscious mind, the writer-director has devised a heist thriller for surrealists, a Jungian's Rififi, that challenges viewers to sift through multiple layers of (un)reality."[121] Jim Vejvoda of IGN rated the film as perfect, deeming it "a singular accomplishment from a filmmaker who has only gotten better with each film."[122] Relevant Magazine's David Roark called it Nolan's greatest accomplishment, saying, "Visually, intellectually and emotionally, Inception is a masterpiece."[123] Empire magazine rated it five stars in the August 2010 issue and wrote, "it feels like Stanley Kubrick adapting the work of the great sci-fi author William Gibson ... Nolan delivers another true original: welcome to an undiscovered country."[124] Entertainment Weekly gave the film a B+ rating and Lisa Schwarzbaum wrote, "It's a rolling explosion of images as hypnotizing and sharply angled as any in a drawing by M.C. Escher or a state-of-the-biz video game; the backwards splicing of Nolan's own Memento looks rudimentary by comparison."[125] The New York Post gave the film a four-star rating and Lou Lumenick wrote, "DiCaprio, who has never been better as the tortured hero, draws you in with a love story that will appeal even to non-sci-fi fans."[126] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times awarded the film a full four stars and said that Inception "is all about process, about fighting our way through enveloping sheets of reality and dream, reality within dreams, dreams without reality. It's a breathtaking juggling act."[127] Richard Roeper, also of the Sun-Times, gave Inception a perfect score of "A+" and called it "one of the best movies of the [21st] century."[128] BBC Radio 5 Live's Mark Kermode named Inception as the best film of 2010, stating, "Inception is proof that people are not stupid, that cinema is not trash, and that it is possible for blockbusters and art to be the same thing."[129] In his review for the Chicago Tribune, Michael Phillips gave the film 3 stars out of 4 and wrote, "I found myself wishing Inception were weirder, further out ... the film is Nolan's labyrinth all the way, and it's gratifying to experience a summer movie with large visual ambitions and with nothing more or less on its mind than (as Shakespeare said) a dream that hath no bottom."[130] Time magazine's Richard Corliss wrote the film's "noble intent is to implant one man's vision in the mind of a vast audience ... The idea of moviegoing as communal dreaming is a century old. With Inception, viewers have a chance to see that notion get a state-of-the-art update."[131] Los Angeles Times' Kenneth Turan felt that Nolan was able to blend "the best of traditional and modern filmmaking. If you're searching for smart and nervy popular entertainment, this is what it looks like."[132] USA Today rated the film three-and-a-half stars out of four and Claudia Puig felt that Nolan "regards his viewers as possibly smarter than they are—or at least as capable of rising to his inventive level. That's a tall order. But it's refreshing to find a director who makes us stretch, even occasionally struggle, to keep up."[133] Not all reviewers gave the film positive reviews. New York magazine's David Edelstein claimed in his review to "have no idea what so many people are raving about. It's as if someone went into their heads while they were sleeping and planted the idea that Inception is a visionary masterpiece and—hold on ... Whoa! I think I get it. The movie is a metaphor for the power of delusional hype—a metaphor for itself."[134] Rex Reed of The New York Observer explained the film's development as "pretty much what we've come to expect from summer movies in general and Christopher Nolan movies in particular ... [it] doesn't seem like much of an accomplishment to me."[135] A. O. Scott of The New York Times commented "there is a lot to see in Inception, there is nothing that counts as genuine vision. Mr. Nolan's idea of the mind is too literal, too logical, and too rule-bound to allow the full measure of madness."[136] David Denby, writing in The New Yorker, considered the film not nearly as much fun as Nolan imagined it to be, concluding, "Inception is a stunning-looking film that gets lost in fabulous intricacies, a movie devoted to its own workings and to little else."[66] While some critics have tended to view the film as perfectly straightforward, and even criticize its overarching themes as "the stuff of torpid platitudes," online discussion has been much more positive.[137] Heated debate has centered on the ambiguity of the ending, with many critics like Devin Faraci making the case that the film is self-referential and tongue-in-cheek, both a film about film-making and a dream about dreams.[138] Other critics read Inception as Christian allegory and focus on the film's use of religious and water symbolism.[139] Yet other critics, such as Kristin Thompson, see less value in the ambiguous ending of the film and more in its structure and novel method of storytelling, highlighting Inception as a new form of narrative that revels in "continuous exposition".[140] Several sources have noted many plot similarities between the film and the 2002 Uncle Scrooge comic The Dream of a Lifetime by Don Rosa.[141][142][143] In April 2014, The Daily Telegraph placed the title on its top ten list of the most overrated films. Telegraph's Tim Robey stated, "It's a criminal failing of the movie that it purports to be about people’s dreams being invaded, but demonstrates no instinct at all for what a dream has ever felt like, and no flair for making us feel like we're in one, at any point."[144] The film won an informal poll by The Los Angeles Times as the most overrated movie of 2010.[145] In March 2011, the film was voted by BBC Radio 1 and BBC Radio 1Xtra listeners as their ninth favorite film of all time.[146] Inception was voted as the third best sci-fi film of all time in the 2011 list Best in Film: The Greatest Movies of Our Time, based on a poll conducted by ABC and People. In 2012, Inception was ranked the 35th Best Edited Film of All Time by the Motion Picture Editors Guild.[147] In the same year, Total Film named it the most rewatchable movie of all time.[148] In 2014, Empire ranked Inception the tenth greatest film ever made on their list of "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time" as voted by the magazine's readers,[149] while Rolling Stone magazine named it the second best science fiction film since the turn of the century.[150] Inception was ranked 84th on Hollywood's 100 Favorite Films, a list compiled by The Hollywood Reporter in 2014, surveying "Studio chiefs, Oscar winners and TV royalty".[151] In 2016, Inception was voted the 51st best film of the 21st Century by BBC, as picked by 177 film critics from around the world.[152] Top ten lists Inception was listed on many critics' top ten lists.[153] 1st – Richard Roeper, Chicago Sun-Times 1st – Kenneth Turan, Los Angeles Times (tied with The Social Network and Toy Story 3) 1st – Tasha Robinson, The A.V. Club 1st – Empire 1st – Kirk Honeycutt, The Hollywood Reporter 2nd – Peter Travers, Rolling Stone 2nd - Christy Lemire, Associated Press 2nd – James Berardinelli, Reelviews 2nd – Gregory Ellwood, HitFix 2nd – Lisa Kennedy, Denver Post 2nd – Bill Goodykoontz, Arizona Republic 3rd – Stephen Holden, The New York Times 3rd – Phillip French, The Observer 3rd – FX Feeney, The Village Voice 4th – Keith Phipps, The A.V. Club 5th – Nathan Rabin, The A.V. Club 5th – Lou Lumenick, New York Post 6th – Roger Ebert, Chicago Sun-Times 6th – Elizabeth Weitzman, New York Daily News 6th – Ann Hornaday, Washington Post 6th – Caryn James, Indiewire 6th – Claudia Puig, USA Today 6th - David Germain, Associated Press 6th - Rene Rodriguez, Miami Herald 7th – Noel Murray, The A.V. Club 8th – Mike Scott, The Times-Picayune 9th – Drew McWeeny, HitFix 10th – J. Hoberman, The Village Voice 10th – Peter Hartlaub, San Francisco Chronicle Accolades Main article: List of accolades received by Inception Inception appeared on over 273 critics' lists of the top ten films of 2010, being picked as No.1 on 55 of those lists. It was the second most mentioned film in both the top ten and No.1 lists only behind The Social Network and was one of the most critically acclaimed films of 2010, alongside the former, Toy Story 3, The King's Speech, and Black Swan.[154] The film won many awards in technical categories, such as Academy Awards for Best Cinematography, Best Sound Editing, Best Sound Mixing, and Best Visual Effects,[64] and the British Academy Film Awards for Best Production Design, Best Special Visual Effects and Best Sound.[155] In most of its artistic nominations, such as Film, Director, and Screenplay at the Oscars, BAFTAs and Golden Globes, the film was defeated by The Social Network and The King's Speech.[64][155][156] However, the film did win the two highest honors for a science fiction or fantasy film: the 2011 Bradbury Award for best dramatic production[157] and the 2011 Hugo Award for best dramatic presentation, long form.[158] In popular culture Numerous pop and hip hop songs reference the film, including Common's "Blue Sky", N.E.R.D's "Hypnotize U", XV's "The Kick", The Black Eyed Peas' "Just Can’t Get Enough", Lil Wayne's "6 Foot 7 Foot", J. Lo', "On the Floor", and B.o.B's "Strange Clouds", while T.I. had Inception-based artwork on two of his mixtapes. An instrumental track by Joe Budden is titled "Inception."[159] The film inspired the suffix -ception, which can be appended to a noun to indicate a layering, nesting, or recursion of the thing in question.[160] See also Film portal Suggestion Simulacrum References ^ "Inception". British Board of Film Classification. June 29, 2010. Retrieved August 8, 2010.  ^ a b "Inception (2010)". British Film Institute. Retrieved December 13, 2014.  ^ a b c d "Inception (2010)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved January 16, 2011.  ^ Eisenberg, Mike (May 5, 2010). "Updated 'Inception' Synopsis Reveals More". Screen Rant. Retrieved July 18, 2010. One last job could give him his life back but only if he can accomplish the impossible—inception.  ^ a b c d e f g h Hiscock, John (July 1, 2010). "Inception: Christopher Nolan interview". Daily Telegraph. UK. Retrieved July 7, 2010.  ^ a b c d e Itzkoff, Dave (June 30, 2010). "A Man and His Dream: Christopher Nolan and Inception". The New York Times. Retrieved July 1, 2010. This is a film I first pitched to the studio probably nine years ago, and I wasn't really ready to finish it. I needed more experience in making a big movie.  ^ a b Fleming, Michael (February 11, 2009). "Nolan tackles Inception for WB". Variety. Retrieved February 25, 2009.  ^ "Filming Locations – NolanFans". December 6, 2009. Retrieved March 23, 2012.  ^ Fritz, Ben (July 15, 2010). "Movie projector: 'Inception' headed for No. 1, 'Sorcerer's Apprentice' to open in third". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 27, 2010. It's also one of the most expensive, at $160 million, a cost that was split by Warner and Legendary Pictures.  ^ Subers, Ray (July 16, 2010). "Weekend Briefing: 'Inception' Breaks In, 'Apprentice' Lacks Magic". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 18, 2010.  ^ Peters, Jenny (July 14, 2010). "Partying for a Cause at the "Inception" Premiere". Fashion Wire Daily. Retrieved October 1, 2010.  ^ Zeitchik, Steven (July 19, 2010). "'Inception' rides out critical backlash". Los Angeles Times.  ^ a b c d e f g Weintraub, Steve (March 25, 2010). "Christopher Nolan and Emma Thomas Interview". Collider.com. Retrieved April 6, 2010.  ^ a b c Kit, Borys (April 1, 2009). "Three circle Nolan's 'Inception'". The Hollywood Reporter. Archived from the original on April 6, 2009. Retrieved April 2, 2009.  ^ Masters, Kim (November 10, 2010). "The A-List Directors". The Hollywood Reporter.  ^ Charles Burnetts, "'Downwards is the only way forwards': 'Dream Space,' Parallel Time and Selfhood in Inception", in: Jones, Matthew and Omrod, Joan, eds. Time Travel in Popular Media: Essays on Film, Television, Literature and Video Games. Jefferson, N.C.: McFarland, 2015. p. 234-246, p. 244. ^ Production Notes 2010, p. 7. ^ Murray, Rebecca (July 15, 2010). "Joseph Gordon-Levitt Inception Interview". About.com. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ Rappe, Elisabeth (24 April 2009). "CHRISTOPHER NOLAN TRADES JAMES FRANCO FOR JOSEPH GORDON-LEVITT IN 'INCEPTION'". MTV News. Retrieved 23 June 2016.  ^ Production Notes 2010, p. 8. ^ Lennon, Christine (July 12, 2010). "Inception: Ellen Page interview". The Daily Telegraph. UK. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ Patches, Matt (July 12, 2010). "Inception's Tom Hardy Is The Forger, Darling". UGO. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ a b c Production Notes 2010, p. 10. ^ Billington, Alex (July 20, 2010). "Interview: Japanese Actor Ken Watanabe – Saito in Inception". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ a b c Production Notes 2010, p. 11. ^ O'Doherty, Cahir (July 15, 2010). "Hollywood golden boy Cillian Murphy talks about 'Inception'". Irish Voice Reporter. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ a b George (July 23, 2009). "Inception Cast and Crew Updates". Cinema Rewind. Retrieved August 31, 2009.  ^ Production Notes 2010, p. 9 and 10. ^ Tapley, Kristopher (April 24, 2009). "Caine confirmed in small role in Inception, Gordon-Levitt also joins the cast". InContention. Retrieved April 24, 2009.  ^ Boursaw, Jane (August 26, 2009). "Ellen Page on the set of Inception in Paris". EveryJoe. Retrieved August 26, 2009.  ^ Martin, Michael (May 10, 2010). "Talulah Riley". Interview Magazine. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ a b c d e f Boucher, Geoff (April 4, 2010). "Inception breaks into dreams". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved April 6, 2010.  ^ Marikar, Sheila (July 16, 2010). "Inside 'Inception': Could Christopher Nolan's Dream World Exist in Real Life? Dream Experts Say 'Inception's' Conception of the Subconscious Isn't Far From Science". ABC News. Retrieved September 4, 2010.  ^ Itzkoff, Dave (June 30, 2010). "The Man Behind the Dreamscape". The New York Times. Retrieved July 1, 2010.  ^ Jolin, Dan (July 2010). "Crime of the Century". Empire. pp. 93–94.  ^ Production Notes, 2010, p. 13. ^ a b Production Notes, 2010, p. 14. ^ a b Heuring, David (July 2010). "Dream Thieves". American Cinematographer. American Society of Cinematographers. p. 29. Retrieved September 22, 2010.  ^ Heuring, July 2010, p. 32. ^ Gordinier, Jeff (August 2010). "Joseph Gordon-Levitt Comes of Age". Details. p. 4. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ "Where was 'Inception' filmed? - British Film Locations". British Film Locations. Retrieved April 29, 2015.  ^ a b Production Notes, 2010, p. 17. ^ The historic medina is south west of the cited "Grand Souk", which is no longer even a market place, just a busy transportation junction, Production Notes, 2010, p. 18. ^ a b Production Notes, 2010, p. 19. ^ Production Notes, 2010, p. 20. ^ Production Notes, 2010, p. 21. ^ a b c Ditzian, Eric (July 14, 2010). "Inception Stars Reveal Secrets Behind Epic Van Scene". MTV. Retrieved July 22, 2010.  ^ Production Notes, 2010, p. 22. ^ Jolin, July 2010, pp. 93. ^ Jolin, July 2010, pp. 91. ^ "From The Dark Knight to Inception, Wally Pfister, ASC refuses to compromise". kodak. Retrieved May 19, 2013.  ^ "Christopher Nolan Tested 3D Conversion For 'Inception,' Might Use Process For 'Batman 3'". The Playlist. June 14, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2011.  ^ a b "Christopher Nolan's dim view of a Hollywood craze: 'I'm not a huge fan of 3-D'". Los Angeles Times. June 13, 2010. Retrieved January 22, 2011.  ^ Gallagher, Brian (February 24, 2011). "Inception being converted to 3D Blu-ray?". movieweb.com. Retrieved February 27, 2011.  ^ Heuring, July 2010, pp. 35-36. ^ "Inception". Empire. April 2010.  ^ Production Notes, 2010, p. 12. ^ a b c d Russell, Terrence (July 20, 2010). "How Inception's Astonishing Visuals Came to Life". Wired. Retrieved July 21, 2010.  ^ "Hans Zimmer's 'Inception' Score Will Release On July 13th". ScreenRant.com. June 18, 2010. Retrieved July 1, 2010.  ^ a b Cassidy, Kevin (July 13, 2010). "Q&A: Composer Hans Zimmer". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved July 14, 2010.  ^ a b Martens, Todd (July 20, 2010). "Hans Zimmer and Johnny Marr talk about the sad romance of 'Inception'". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 20, 2010.  ^ "Inception: Music from the Motion Picture official website". Warner Bros. Retrieved July 3, 2011.  ^ "Inception Blu-ray review from Blu-ray.com". Retrieved August 8, 2012.  ^ a b c "Nominees for the 83rd Academy Awards". Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. Retrieved January 28, 2011.  ^ a b c Paul, I. A. Desiring-Machines in American Cinema: What Inception tells us about our experience of reality and film Senses of Cinema, Issue 56. Retrieved October 4, 2011 ^ a b c d Denby, David (July 26, 2010). "Dream Factory". The New Yorker. Retrieved February 10, 2011.  ^ Breznican, Anthony (July 15, 2010). "With Inception, Chris Nolan's head games continue". USA Today. Retrieved July 15, 2010.  ^ Lehrer, J. The Neuroscience of Inception, Wired, July 26, 2010. Retrieved October 8, 2011. ^ Dreyfus, Stéphanie "Inception", allégorie onirique sur l'illusion cinématographique La Croix, July 20, 2010. Retrieved January 3, 2012 ^ Production Notes 2010, p. 9 ^ a b c Capps, Robers (December 8, 2010). "Inception's director discusses the film's ending and creation". Wired. Retrieved January 24, 2011.  ^ Revisiting INCEPTION www.davidbordwell.net, August 12, 2010. Retrieved October 6, 2011. ^ INCEPTION; or, Dream a Little Dream within a Dream with Me www.davidbordwell.net. August 6, 2010. Retrieved October 6, 2011 ^ Howell, Peter (July 15, 2010). "Howell: Relax and enjoy the ride, Inception director says". Toronto Star. Retrieved September 4, 2010.  ^ "Inception par Christopher Nolan: Interview, références, indices..". Excessif.com. Retrieved January 4, 2010.  (Translation) (French) ^ a b Jensen, Jeff (November 30, 2010). "Christopher Nolan on his 'last' Batman movie, an 'Inception' videogame, and that spinning top". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved January 6, 2011.  ^ Christopher Nolan. Inception – The Shooting Script. Insight Editions. p. 218. ISBN 978-1-60887-015-8.  ^ Moore, Ben (September 10, 2010). "Michael Caine Says 'Inception' Ending Was No Dream". ScreenRant.com. Retrieved June 20, 2011.  ^ "RevolvingDoorProject – INCEPTION: Wait.. What Happened?" Inception Ending RSS. N.p., n.d. Web. 12 July 2014. ^ De Benedetti, Luca. "Inception: The Theory of the Ring." Felix Online. N.p., 12 Jan. 2013. Web. 12 July 2014. ^ Fisher, Mark "The Lost Unconscious: Delusions and Dreams in Inception", Film Quarterly, Vol. 64, No. 3 (Spring 2011), pp. 37-45 University of California Press ^ Fritz, Ben (July 7, 2010). "Warner gambles on an unproven commodity". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ "Finding 'Salt;' Marketing 'Inception'". KCRW. June 18, 2010. Retrieved July 4, 2011.  ^ Goldberg, Matt (December 15, 2010). "First Poster from Christopher Nolan's INCEPTION Starring Leonardo DiCaprio". Collider.com. Retrieved July 5, 2011.  ^ Lesnic, Silas (April 5, 2010). "Start Your Dream Weaving". UGO Networks. Retrieved July 5, 2011.  ^ a b Gallagher, Brian (May 10, 2010). "Official Full-Length Inception Trailer Is Here!". MovieWeb. Retrieved July 5, 2011.  ^ Thill, Scott (June 1, 2010). "Mysterious Dream-Share Manual Is a Viral Mind-Wipe". Wired. Retrieved June 3, 2010.  ^ Newman, Nick (June 7, 2010). "New Inception Viral Poster". The Film Stage. Retrieved June 7, 2010.  ^ DiOrio, Carl (July 9, 2010). "'Inception' is no dream for marketers". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved May 5, 2011.  ^ Owen, Matt (July 21, 2010). "Inception: multichannel marketing that works like a dream". eConsultancy. Retrieved July 4, 2011.  ^ "Mind Heist".  ^ "'Inception' Trailer Composer Zack Hemsey Profiled". Slash Film. April 7, 2011. Retrieved April 13, 2011.  ^ "GHOSTBUSTERS Trailer Re-Cut to INCEPTION Score". Collider.com. January 7, 2011. Retrieved April 13, 2011.  ^ "50s Inception Trailer Profiled". CollegeHumor. October 5, 2010. Retrieved April 13, 2011.  ^ "A Capella Inception Trailer". CollegeHumor. September 13, 2010. Retrieved April 13, 2011.  ^ Raup, Jordan (June 7, 2010). "Behind The Scenes Inception Featurette Now Available In HD". The Film Stage. Retrieved June 7, 2010.  ^ "PHOTOS – Inception : découvrez le DVD en images". Première. Retrieved May 4, 2011.  ^ Redwine, Ivana (December 7, 2010). "New DVD Releases – December 7, 2010". About.com. Retrieved May 4, 2011.  ^ Barton, Joe (December 6, 2010). "New on DVD: Week of December 6". Moviefone. Retrieved April 5, 2011.  ^ Inception BD/DVD Briefcase Gift Set. Warner Bros. Retrieved November 23, 2010. ^ Jensen, Jeff (November 30, 2010). "Christopher Nolan on his 'last' Batman movie, an 'Inception' videogame, and that spinning top". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved December 3, 2010.  ^ "Inception (2010)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved August 18, 2011.  ^ a b Bock, Jeff (February 24, 2009). "Wb name drops big titles". ERC Box Office. Retrieved February 25, 2009.  ^ Vlessing, Etan (October 1, 2009). "Imax books Inception". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved October 1, 2009.  ^ Plumb, Alastair (July 9, 2010). "Inception World Premiere Report". Empire. Retrieved July 9, 2010.  ^ Finke, Nikki (July 17, 2010). "'Inception' Dreams Up $21.4M Friday And Possible $52M Weekend; No Magic For 'Sorcerer's Apprentice' With $5.4M/$16.5M". Deadline.com. Retrieved July 18, 2010.  ^ a b Gray, Brandon (July 19, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Inception' Incites Intense Interest". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved July 21, 2010.  ^ Gray, Brandon (July 26, 2010). "'Inception' Maintains Grip, 'Salt' Savors Second Place". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 4, 2010.  ^ Gray, Brandon (August 2, 2010). "'Inception' Keeps Dream Alive". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 4, 2010.  ^ Gray, Brandon (August 9, 2010). "Weekend Report: 'Other Guys' Arrest Audiences, 'Step Up' Gets Served, 'Inception' Lingers". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 19, 2011.  ^ "Inception". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved October 22, 2010.  ^ "2010 DOMESTIC GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 6, 2010.  ^ "2010 WORLDWIDE GROSSES". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 9, 2010.  ^ "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved June 19, 2011.  ^ "Christopher Nolan". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved September 6, 2010.  ^ "Leonardo DiCaprio". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved November 15, 2010.  ^ "Inception". Rotten Tomatoes. Flixster. Retrieved June 30, 2016.  ^ "Inception". Metacritic. CBS. Retrieved July 27, 2010.  ^ Stewart, Andrew (July 18, 2010). "'Inception' tops weekend box office". Variety. Retrieved August 18, 2010.  ^ Travers, Peter (July 12, 2010). "Inception". Rolling Stone. Retrieved July 14, 2010.  ^ Chang, Justin (July 5, 2010). "Inception". Variety. Retrieved July 5, 2010.  ^ Vejvoda, Jim (July 6, 2010). "Inception Para la gran mayoria de los criticos Inception es una de las mejores peliculas de la historia del cine. Review". IGN. Retrieved July 5, 2010.  ^ Roark, David (July 12, 2010). "Inception". Relevant Magazine. Retrieved July 14, 2010.  ^ Pierce, Nev (June 7, 2010). "Inception". Empire. Retrieved July 7, 2010.  ^ Schwarzbaum, Lisa (July 12, 2010). "Inception". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Lumenick, Lou (July 14, 2010). "Dream team!". New York Post. Retrieved July 14, 2010.  ^ Ebert, Roger (July 14, 2010). "Inception". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved July 15, 2010.  ^ Roeper, Richard. "Inception Review". Chicago Sun-Times. Retrieved July 21, 2010.  ^ Kermode, Mark (December 24, 2010). Kermode Uncut: My Top Five Films of the Year. BBC. Event occurs at 5:05. Retrieved February 9, 2011.  ^ Phillips, Michael (July 15, 2010). "Inception". Chicago Tribune. Retrieved July 15, 2010.  ^ Corliss, Richard (July 14, 2010). "Inception: Whose Mind Is It, Anyway?". Time. Retrieved July 15, 2010.  ^ Turan, Kenneth (July 16, 2010). "Inception". Los Angeles Times. Retrieved July 16, 2010.  ^ Puig, Claudia (July 15, 2010). "You definitely won't sleep through complex thriller Inception". USA Today. Retrieved July 16, 2010.  ^ Edelstein, David (July 11, 2010). "Dream a Little Dream". New York. Retrieved July 13, 2010.  ^ Reed, Rex (July 13, 2010). "Can Someone Please Explain Inception to Me?". The New York Observer. Retrieved July 14, 2010.  ^ Scott, A. O. (July 15, 2010). "This Time the Dream's on Me". The New York Times. Retrieved July 15, 2010.  ^ Schager, Nick (July 14, 2010). "Inception". Slant Magazine. Retrieved May 27, 2011.  ^ Faraci, Devin (July 19, 2010). "Never Wake Up: The Meaning and Secret of Inception". Chud.com. Retrieved May 27, 2011.  ^ Lancashire, David (October 6, 2010). "Cobb is Dead". Retrieved May 27, 2011.  ^ Thomas, Kristin (August 12, 2010). "Revisiting Inception". Observations on Film Art (blog). Retrieved May 27, 2011.  ^ Brown, Damon (August 11, 2010). "Was 'Inception' inspired by Donald Duck?". CNN. Retrieved December 29, 2011.  ^ Gornstein, Leslie (August 4, 2010). "Did Inception Really Rip Off Scrooge McDuck?". E! Online. Retrieved December 29, 2011.  ^ Sean, O'Neal (August 4, 2010). "The "Inception ripped-off Scrooge McDuck" theory that will briefly amuse you". The A.V. Club. Retrieved December 29, 2011.  ^ Robey, Tim (2014-04-21). "10 most overrated films of all time". telegraph.co.uk. Telegraph Media Group. Retrieved 2014-06-01.  ^ Zeitchik, Steven (2010-12-30). "'Inception' wins informal poll as most overrated movie of 2010 (Part 2)". latimes.com. The Los Angeles Times. Retrieved 2014-06-02.  ^ "Radio 1 Movies Blog". BBC. Retrieved 2013-07-23.  ^ "The 75 Best Editied Films". CineMontage. Summer 2013. Retrieved 1 June 2013.  ^ "50 Most Rewatchable Movies". Total Film. Retrieved July 24, 2013.  ^ "The 301 Greatest Movies Of All Time". Empire. Retrieved May 29, 2014.  ^ "The Top 20 Sci-Fi Films of the 21st Century". Rolling Stone. Retrieved 2014-08-14.  ^ "Hollywood's 100 Favorite Films". The Hollywood Reporter. Retrieved June 22, 2015.  ^ "The 21st Century's 100 Greatest Films". BBC. Retrieved August 23, 2016.  ^ http://www.metacritic.com/feature/film-critic-top-ten-lists ^ "Home Page – Best of 2010". CriticsTop10. Retrieved May 4, 2011.  ^ a b "2011 BAFTA Awards Nominees". British Academy of Film and Television Arts. Retrieved January 28, 2011.  ^ "68th Annual Golden Globe Awards Nominations". Hollywood Foreign Press Association. Retrieved January 28, 2011.  ^ "2011 Nebula Award winners". Tor.com. Retrieved October 16, 2011.  ^ "2011 Hugo Award winners". Hugo Awards. Retrieved October 16, 2011.  ^ Zorgel, Aaron (March 8, 2012). "Why do rappers love the movie Inception so much?". AUX.TV. Retrieved December 23, 2016.  ^ "-ception - The Rice University Neologisms Database". Rice University. Retrieved December 23, 2016.  Further reading Johnson, David Kyle (Editor); Irwin, William (2011). Inception and Philosophy: Because It's Never Just a Dream. John Wiley & Sons. ISBN 1-118-07263-4.  Nolan, Christopher (Author); Nolan, Jonathan (2010). Inception: The Shooting Script. Insight Editions. ISBN 1-60887-015-4.  Crawford, Kevin Ray (Author) (2012). "The Rhetorics of the Time-Image: Deleuzian Metadiscourse on the Role of Nooshock Temporality (viz. "Inception") in Christopher Nolan's Cinema of the Brain". ProQuest LLC.  External links Wikiquote has quotations related to: Inception Wikimedia Commons has media related to Inception. Official website Inception at the Internet Movie Database Inception at AllMovie Inception at Rotten Tomatoes v t e Films directed by Christopher Nolan Feature films Following (1998) Memento (2000) Insomnia (2002) Batman Begins (2005) The Prestige (2006) The Dark Knight (2008) Inception (2010) The Dark Knight Rises (2012) Interstellar (2014) Dunkirk (2017) Short films Doodlebug (1997) Quay (2015)   Awards for Inception v t e Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Action Movie The Dark Knight (2008) Avatar (2009) Inception (2010) Drive (2011) Skyfall (2012) Lone Survivor (2013) Guardians of the Galaxy (2014) Mad Max: Fury Road (2015) Hacksaw Ridge (2016) v t e Empire Award for Best Film Braveheart (1996) Se7en (1997) Men in Black (1998) Titanic (1999) The Matrix (2000) Gladiator (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004) The Bourne Supremacy (2005) King Kong (2006) Casino Royale (2007) The Bourne Ultimatum (2008) The Dark Knight (2009) Avatar (2010) Inception (2011) Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 (2012) Skyfall (2013) Gravity (2014) Interstellar (2015) The Revenant (2016) v t e Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004) The Incredibles (2005) Serenity (2006) Pan's Labyrinth (2007) Stardust (2008) WALL-E (2009) Moon (2010) Inception (2011) Game of Thrones (season 1) (2012) The Avengers (2013) Gravity (2014) Guardians of the Galaxy (2015) The Martian (2016) v t e Nebula Award for Best Script/Ray Bradbury Award Nebula Award for Best Script Soylent Green – Stanley R. Greenberg (1973) Sleeper – Woody Allen (1974) Young Frankenstein – Mel Brooks and Gene Wilder (1975) Star Wars – George Lucas (1977) The Sixth Sense – M. Night Shyamalan (1999) Galaxy Quest – David Howard and Robert Gordon (2000) Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon James Schamus, Kuo Jung Tsai, and Hui-Ling Wang (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Stephen Sinclair, and Peter Jackson (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2004) Serenity – Joss Whedon (2005) Howl's Moving Castle – Hayao Miyazaki, Cindy Davis Hewitt, and Donald H. Hewitt (2006) Pan's Labyrinth – Guillermo del Toro (2007) WALL-E – Andrew Stanton, Jim Reardon, and Pete Docter (2008) Ray Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation Terminator 2: Judgment Day – James Cameron (1992) Babylon 5 – J. Michael Straczynski (1999) 2000X – Tales of the Next Millennia – Yuri Rasovsky and Harlan Ellison (2001) Joss Whedon (2008) District 9 – Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell (2009) Inception – Christopher Nolan (2010) Doctor Who: "The Doctor's Wife" – Richard Clark and Neil Gaiman (2011) Beasts of the Southern Wild – Benh Zeitlin, Lucy Alibar (2012) Gravity – Alfonso Cuarón and Jonás Cuarón (2013) Guardians of the Galaxy – James Gunn and Nicole Perlman (2014) Mad Max: Fury Road – George Miller, Brendan McCarthy and Nico Lathouris (2015) v t e Saturn Award for Best Science Fiction Film Slaughterhouse-Five (1972) Soylent Green (1973) Rollerball (1974/1975) Logan's Run (1976) Star Wars (1977) Superman (1978) Alien (1979) The Empire Strikes Back (1980) Superman II (1981) E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982) Return of the Jedi (1983) The Terminator (1984) Back to the Future (1985) Aliens (1986) RoboCop (1987) Alien Nation (1988) Total Recall (1989/1990) Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1991) Star Trek VI: The Undiscovered Country (1992) Jurassic Park (1993) Stargate (1994) 12 Monkeys (1995) Independence Day (1996) Men in Black (1997) Armageddon/Dark City (1998) The Matrix (1999) X-Men (2000) A.I. Artificial Intelligence (2001) Minority Report (2002) X2: X-Men United (2003) Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004) Star Wars: Episode III – Revenge of the Sith (2005) Children of Men (2006) Cloverfield (2007) Iron Man (2008) Avatar (2009) Inception (2010) Rise of the Planet of the Apes (2011) The Avengers (2012) Gravity (2013) Interstellar (2014) Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2015) Authority control WorldCat Identities VIAF: 202806348 GND: 7728590-6 SUDOC: 179366971 BNF: cb16267172d (data)