This article is about the 2003 live-action film. For the book from which it was adapted, see The Return of the King. For other uses, see The Return of the King (disambiguation). The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King Theatrical release poster Directed by Peter Jackson Produced by Barrie M. Osborne Fran Walsh Peter Jackson Screenplay by Fran Walsh Philippa Boyens Peter Jackson Based on The Return of the King by J. R. R. Tolkien Starring Elijah Wood Ian McKellen Liv Tyler Viggo Mortensen Sean Astin Cate Blanchett John Rhys-Davies Bernard Hill Billy Boyd Dominic Monaghan Orlando Bloom Hugo Weaving Miranda Otto David Wenham Karl Urban John Noble Andy Serkis Ian Holm Sean Bean Music by Howard Shore Cinematography Andrew Lesnie Edited by Jamie Selkirk Production companies WingNut Films The Saul Zaentz Company Distributed by New Line Cinema Release date 1 December 2003 (2003-12-01) (Wellington) 17 December 2003 (2003-12-17) (United States) 18 December 2003 (2003-12-18) (New Zealand) Running time 200 minutes[1] (Theatrical) 251 minutes (Extended) Country New Zealand[2] United States[3][4][5] Language English Budget $94 million[6] Box office $1.120 billion[6] The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King is a 2003 epic high fantasy adventure film produced, written and directed by Peter Jackson based on the second and third volumes of J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings.[7][8] It is the third and final installment in The Lord of the Rings trilogy, following The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) and The Two Towers (2002), preceding The Hobbit film trilogy (2012–14). Released on 17 December 2003, The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King received rave reviews and universal acclaim,[9] and became one of the greatest critical and box-office successes of all time. It was the second film to gross $1 billion worldwide ($1.12 billion), becoming the highest-grossing film released by New Line Cinema, as well as the biggest financial success for Time Warner in general, until Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 ($1.31 billion) surpassed The Return of the King's final gross in 2011. The film was the highest-grossing film of 2003 and, by the end of its theatrical run, the second highest-grossing film in history. As of January 2017, it is the fourteenth highest-grossing film of all time. At the 76th Academy Awards, it won all 11 Academy Awards for which it was nominated, therefore holding the record for highest Oscar sweep. The wins included the awards for Best Picture, the first and only time a fantasy film has done so;[10] it was also the second sequel to win a Best Picture Oscar (following The Godfather Part II) and Best Director. The film jointly holds the record for the largest number of Academy Awards won with Ben-Hur (1959) and Titanic (1997). The film has been re-released twice, in 2011 and 2017. Contents 1 Plot 2 Cast 3 Comparison with the source material 4 Production 4.1 Design 4.2 Principal photography 4.3 Pick-ups 4.4 Editing 4.5 Visual effects 4.6 Sound effects 4.7 Score 5 Release 5.1 Home media 6 Reception 6.1 Box office 6.2 Critical response 6.3 Accolades 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Plot[edit] Gandalf leads Aragorn, Legolas, Gimli, and King Théoden to Isengard where they reunite with Merry and Pippin. With Saruman defeated, Gandalf retrieves Saruman's palantír. Pippin later steals a glance into the seeing-stone, and suffers a mental attack from Sauron himself. Gandalf deduces that Sauron will attack Gondor's capital Minas Tirith. He rides there to warn them, taking Pippin with him because Sauron believes Pippin is the ring bearer. Meanwhile, Frodo Baggins and Samwise Gamgee are led by Gollum to Minas Morgul where they witness the Witch-king of Angmar leading an Orc army to drive Denethor's younger son Faramir from Gondor's final defences along the river Anduin. The hobbits begin climbing a precarious stair carved in the cliff face that will take them into Mordor via a 'secret way'. But having overheard Gollum's plot to regain the Ring, Sam keeps a suspicious eye on him. Sauron's army strikes and overwhelms the city of Osgiliath, forcing Faramir and his garrison to retreat back to Minas Tirith. While helping Théoden gather his forces, Aragorn is approached by Elrond who informs him Arwen is dying. Following a vision of her son, she refused to leave Middle Earth. Elrond gives Aragorn the sword Andúril, Isildur's sword Narsil reforged, so he can reclaim his birthright while gaining reinforcements from the Dead Men of Dunharrow. Joined by Legolas and Gimli, Aragorn travels to the Paths of the Dead, recruiting the Army of the Dead. Faramir is gravely wounded after a futile effort to retake Osgiliath, and believing his son to be dead, Denethor falls into madness. Gandalf is left to command the city defences against the Orc army led by Gothmog. But as Gothmog's forces eventually force their way into the city, Denethor attempts to kill himself and Faramir on a pyre. Pippin alerts Gandalf and they save Faramir, but Denethor leaps to his death from the top of Minas Tirith just before Théoden and the Rohirrim arrive. Initially, the Rohirrim have the advantage at the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, but are eventually overwhelmed by the Oliphaunt-riding Haradrim while the Witch-king mortally wounds Théoden. Though Théoden's niece Éowyn, having posed as a male soldier, battles and slays the Witch-King with Merry's help, Théoden dies of his wounds. Aragorn arrives with the Army of the Dead, they overcome the Orcs and win the battle. Aragorn and the other captains of Men decide to lead all who can march upon the Black Gate as a distraction, so Frodo and Sam can get to Mount Doom. Gollum manipulates Frodo into leaving Sam behind before they arrive at the tunnel leading to Mordor, and then tricks him into venturing into the lair of the giant spider Shelob. Frodo narrowly escapes but is confronted by Gollum. Frodo tells Gollum that he must destroy the Ring for both of their sakes. Enraged, Gollum falls down a chasm after trying to take the Ring. Frodo continues on but is soon discovered by Shelob, who paralyses and binds Frodo. However, Sam arrives and drives Shelob away. Aragorn's army draw out Sauron's forces and empty Mordor, allowing the exhausted Hobbits to stagger to the volcano, but they are attacked by Gollum just as they reach Mount Doom. Frodo finally succumbs to the Ring's power and claims it as his own, refusing to destroy it. Gollum attacks Frodo and bites his finger off to reclaim the Ring, but Frodo fights back and knocks Gollum, who is holding the Ring, into the volcano. Both Frodo and Sam then escape the volcano. The Ring and Sauron are both destroyed, causing a chain-reaction that consumes the mountain, topples Barad-dûr, and kills most of the fleeing Orcs as the ground crumbles beneath them. Gandalf flies in with eagles to rescue the Hobbits, who awaken later in Minas Tirith and are reunited with the surviving Fellowship members. Aragorn is crowned King of Gondor and takes Arwen as his queen. The Hobbits then return to the Shire where Sam marries Rosie Cotton. Frodo, unable to cope with the traumas of his journey, departs Middle Earth for the Grey Havens with his uncle Bilbo, Gandalf, and the Elves. He leaves Sam the Red Book of Westmarch which details their adventures. Though saddened by Frodo's departure, Sam is gladdened by the warm welcome he receives from his new family upon returning home. Cast[edit] Further information: Cast of The Lord of the Rings film series Like the preceding films in the trilogy, The Return of the King has an ensemble cast,[11] and some of the cast and their respective characters include: Elijah Wood as Frodo Baggins: a young hobbit who continues his quest to destroy the One Ring. Ian McKellen as Gandalf the White: a wizard (one of the Istari) who travels to aid the Men of Gondor, acting as a general at the Siege of Gondor. Viggo Mortensen as Aragorn: a Dúnedain ranger with claims to the throne of Gondor. Liv Tyler as Arwen: Elrond's daughter and Aragorn's true love. Sean Astin as Sam Gamgee: Frodo's loyal hobbit gardener and companion. Sala Baker as Sauron: the Dark Lord of Mordor and the Ring's true master, who is waging war across Middle-Earth once more. Cate Blanchett as Galadriel: the Elven-Queen of Lothlórien who is aware the time of the elves is at an end. John Rhys-Davies as Gimli: a dwarf warrior and companion to Aragorn along with Legolas. Rhys-Davies also voices Treebeard: the ent leader. Bernard Hill as Théoden: the King of Rohan who, after triumphing at Helm's Deep, is preparing his troops for the Battle of the Pelennor Fields. Billy Boyd as Pippin Took: a hobbit who came along with his cousin Frodo and is now caught in the wars. Dominic Monaghan as Merry Brandybuck: another cousin of Frodo's who becomes an esquire of Rohan. Orlando Bloom as Legolas: an elven prince of Mirkwood and skilled archer who aids Aragorn in his quest to reclaim the throne. Hugo Weaving as Elrond: the Elven-King of Rivendell and father of Arwen. Miranda Otto as Éowyn: Théoden's niece, who wishes to prove herself in battle and starts to fall in love with Aragorn. David Wenham as Faramir: a prince of the Stewards of Gondor and Captain of the Rangers defending Osgiliath, who seeks his father's love in vain. Karl Urban as Éomer: Éowyn's brother, who serves as Chief Marshal of the Riders of Rohan and heir to his uncle's throne. John Noble as Denethor: the Steward of Gondor and father of Faramir and Boromir, whose grief over Boromir's death and despair over Mordor's superior numbers drive him into madness during the Siege of Gondor. Andy Serkis as Gollum: a wretched and treacherous hobbit-like creature who kept the Ring for centuries and now guides Frodo and Sam into Mordor. Ian Holm as Bilbo Baggins: Frodo's elderly uncle, who has rapidly aged after giving away the Ring. Marton Csokas as Celeborn: the Elven-King of Lothlórien. Lawrence Makoare as the Witch-King of Angmar: the lord of the Nazgûl, who leads Mordor's assault on Minas Tirith. Makoare also plays Gothmog: an Orc commander, who is voiced by Craig Parker. Thomas Robins as Déagol: Sméagol's cousin. The following appear only in the Extended Edition Christopher Lee as Saruman the White: an Istari wizard, formerly the head of the Istari Order and its White Council, who is now trapped by Treebeard until he is killed by his own servant, Gríma. Brad Dourif as Gríma Wormtongue: Saruman's sycophantic, treacherous servant, who is shot by Legolas after stabbing his own master. Bruce Spence as The Mouth of Sauron: Sauron's ambassador at the Black Gate. There are also cameos from Peter Jackson, Richard Taylor, Gino Acevedo, Rick Porras and Andrew Lesnie on the Corsair ship, although all of them but Jackson appear only in the Extended Edition. Jackson also has another unofficial cameo, as Sam's hand stepping into view when he confronts Shelob.[12] Sean Astin's daughter played Sam and Rosie's older daughter Elanor in the last scene of the film; in the same scene, Sarah McLeod's daughter plays their younger daughter. Jackson's children also cameo as Gondorian extras, while Christian Rivers played a Gondorian soldier guarding the Beacon Pippin lights, and is later seen wounded. Royd Tolkien cameos as a Ranger in Osgiliath,[13] while in the Extended Edition Howard Shore appears as a celebrating soldier at Edoras. Additionally, four of the designers of The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game are featured as Rohirrim at the Pelennor.[14] At the end of the film, during the closing credits, each cast member gets a sketched portrait morphed with the real photograph beside their name, which were sketched by Alan Lee, an idea suggested by Ian McKellen.[15] Comparison with the source material[edit] The film contains major scenes that occurred in the middle portion of the novel The Two Towers but were not included in the film The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers, such as Shelob and the palantír subplot, owing to Jackson's realigning events of the film to fit the timeline as described in the book's Appendices, rather than the main prose.[16] However, it is notable that the plot of the second half of Book III is either completely omitted (chapter "The Road to Isengard") or only shown in one scene (chapter "The Voice of Saruman"). Saruman's murder by Gríma (seen only in the Extended Edition) is moved into the Isengard visit because of the cutting of the Scouring of the Shire. In the film, Saruman drops the palantír, whereas in the book Gríma throws it at the Fellowship, unaware of its value. In the film, all journeys of the companions from Isengard to Minas Tirith are simplified, as the entire company travels from Isengard to Edoras and arrives there simultaneously to recuperate after the Battle of Helm's Deep. Pippin's looking into the palantír happens in Edoras, and he and Gandalf leave for Minas Tirith from there, but in the book this takes place at Dol Baran with the appearance of a Nazgûl on a winged steed, and they stay at Edoras only one night. In contrast to the film, Aragorn and Théoden march from Dol Baran to Helm's Deep to take a night's rest. It is in the Hornburg where Aragorn looks into the Palantír (as opposed to the film's Extended Edition, in which he does so in Minas Tirith after the Battle of the Pelennor Fields) and decides to take the Paths of the Dead. In the film, Aragorn and Theóden depart not before their encampment at Dunharrow, but in the book, Aragorn and the Dúnedain (which are absent in the film) ride from Helm's Deep over the fields to Edoras and then to Dunharrow and the Dimholt, whereas Théoden takes mountain paths and arrives in Dunharrow not before Aragorn left. Théoden is seen to set out directly from Dunharrow to Minas Tirith, omitting his brief return to Edoras from Dunharrow to muster all remaining forces there, as told in the book. The sequence of the Paths of the Dead adds a conversation between Aragorn and the King of the Dead (in the book the Dead don't speak at all) and a scene where the companions must flee an avalanche of skulls, but leaves out the encounter with Baldor's skeleton. In contrast to the book, the viewer doesn't get told what happened in Lebennin between Aragorn and the Corsairs of Umbar. The film version (Extended Edition) doesn't correspond with the map of Gondor, as the company sees a near river with Corsair ships immediately after leaving the Haunted Mountain, which is not possible since the Anduin lies several hundred miles farther east, and assuming that no Corsair ships sailed upstream any of the smaller rivers such as the Morthond. The basis of Elrond and Arwen's subplot arguing about Arwen's fate is derived from the Appendices, but it is largely extended in the film, as is Arwen and Elrond's relevance to the story. The muster of Gondor is absent from the film, and the major captains and generals, including Imrahil and the Knights of Dol Amroth, are not present. Denethor, the Steward of Gondor, was a more tragic character in the book. The film only focuses on his overwhelming grief over the death of Boromir as to ignore Sauron's threat (in the book he already lights the beacons, thus the sequence where Pippin lights them in secret is invented for the film), and is driven over the edge by Faramir's injury. The film only hints at his use of the palantír which drives him mad, information revealed in the Pyre scene, which includes Shadowfax and is more violent than the book. Aware of the very long distance between Rath Dínen and the front of the out-thrust battlement, Jackson has Denethor jump off the Citadel in addition to burning himself on the Pyre, one of the earliest changes.[17] The Rammas Echor which encircles the Pelennor Fields isn't shown in the film. The Battle of the Pelennor Fields is altered: though Faramir goes on a suicide mission, the conflict is a simplification of the siege of Osgiliath. With generals such as Forlong and Imrahil absent, Gandalf commands the defence of Minas Tirith owing to Denethor's despair. While Denethor gives command to Gandalf in the book, in this film Gandalf forcibly takes control as Denethor tells the men to flee rather than fight. The Orcs and Trolls also never get into the city in the book. The Witch-king enters and stands off against Gandalf before the Rohirrim arrive, but in the film Orcs invade the city after Grond breaks the Gate. The confrontation takes place while Gandalf journeys to save Faramir, during which Gandalf has his staff broken in the film (but not in the book). A subplot in which the Rohirrim are aided by the primitive Drúedain into entering the besieged Gondor is also excised. The Red Arrow brought by a messenger from Gondor to ask for aid is absent. Éowyn's presence on the battlefield is unknown to the reader until she takes off her helmet, but in the film the audience is aware, as it would have been difficult to have Miranda Otto playing a man.[18] When hope seems lost, Gandalf comforts Pippin with a description of the Undying Lands, which is a descriptive passage in the book's final chapter.[16] The film depicts the Army of the Dead fighting in the Battle, whereas in the book they are released from service prior to this, after helping Aragorn defeat the Corsairs of Umbar at the port city of Pelargir in Lebennin; Aragorn's reinforcements are merely more Gondorians, and the Dúnedain, Aragorn's people (the rangers of the North). An unstoppable and invulnerable force, the Dead wipe out Sauron's forces. The film also cuts out several supporting characters, such as Halbarad, a friend of Aragorn's, who helps lead the Dúnedain, Beregond, a member of the Citadel Guard of Gondor, whom Pippin befriends, and Elladan and Elrohir, the twin sons of Elrond who deliver Aragorn's banner and accompany him to the Pelennor Fields. Elladan and Elrohir are replaced by Elrond in the film, instead delivering Andúril in Dunharrow, and then returning to Rivendell. In the books Aragorn isn't doubtful about his destiny, but had already decided to claim the throne of Gondor from the beginning of the Quest; thus, it was he who had the shards of Narsil forged to Andúril in Rivendell, carrying it from there on the whole journey. The film also altered the circumstances of Théoden's death; his death speech, in which he names Éomer the new king in the book, is trimmed and delivered to Éowyn instead, with an earlier scene in the Extended Edition even implying that she is next in line for the throne. Théoden's rallying cries before the initial charge are in fact spoken by Éomer in the book upon his realisation that Éowyn is also apparently dead.[16] The Extended Edition presents shortened scenes from the book's chapters in the Houses of Healing: The Warden, the talk of Athelas, the comical conversation with the herb-master, the woman Ioreth and her saying about a King's healing hands and the subsequent realizing of Aragorn's true identity are left out altogether. In the film Aragorn leads the entire remaining force of Rohan and Gondor's men to the Black Gate without incident. In the book tactics are discussed, forces divide and fight smaller skirmishes in Anórien and Ithilien before the army (only a fraction of the full remaining strength of the nations of men) reach the Morannon. The romance that develops between Éowyn and Faramir during their recoveries in the Houses of Healing is also largely cut, presumably to keep the focus on Aragorn and Arwen; the subplot is only briefly referenced in the Extended Edition with a scene where the two hold hands.[16] Sam and Frodo's major rift in their friendship, due to Gollum's machinations, never takes place in the book, but was added by the writers in believing that it added drama and more complexity to the character of Frodo. Frodo enters Shelob's lair alone in the film, whereas in the book he and Sam entered together. This was done to make the scene more horrific with Frodo being alone, and Sam's rescue at the last minute more dramatic. Frodo's ordeal in the Tower of Cirith Ungol and subsequent rescue by Sam are also changed; in the book, Frodo is stripped, beaten, and cruelly interrogated by the Orcs, while in the film, he is tied up but only briefly threatened by an Orc moments before Sam's arrival. The reunion of Frodo and Sam in the film is also shorter and less emotional than in the book; rather than comforting the physically injured and severely traumatized Frodo as in the book, Sam, after killing the Orc that was threatening Frodo but had not struck him, briefly accepts his apology for having doubted him and returns the Ring to him before suggesting that they find some Orc clothing for Frodo to wear. In the film, Sam also does not experience "delusions of grandeur" about what he could do if he took the Ring for himself, like he does in the book. Sam instead overcomes a very brief moment of temptation which, instead of stemming from thoughts of how he could use the Ring for himself, seems to come from his concern for Frodo and wish to reduce the Ring's harm to his friend by sharing the burden. Also, in the film viewers do not know that Sam has the Ring until he gives it back to Frodo, whereas in the book the reader knows that Sam has the Ring. When Sam and Frodo are diverted into the Orc march in Mordor and are about to collapse, in the film's Extended Edition they start a fake combat between each other and thus provoke some chaos during which they manage to escape, instead of slipping off during a congestion caused by several armies trying to get through the narrow Isenmouthe, as told in the novel. Gollum's fall into the lava of Mount Doom was also rewritten for the film, as the writers felt Tolkien's original idea (Gollum simply slips and falls off) was anti-climactic. Originally, an even greater deviation was planned: Frodo would heroically push Gollum over the ledge to destroy him and the Ring, but the production team eventually realised that it looked more like Frodo murdering Gollum. As a result, they had Frodo and Gollum struggle for possession of the Ring and both slip over the edge by accident.[16] In addition to the absent footage from the film are the other major attacks by Sauron on various regions of Middle-earth, referenced only briefly in the main text of The Return of the King,[16] and expanded upon in the Appendices; the invasion of Rohan by the Orcs of Moria, the attacks on Lothlórien and the Woodland Realm of Thranduil by the forces of Dol Guldur, and the attack on Dale and the Lonely Mountain by a force of Easterlings.[16] There are several changes in the Battle of the Black Gate: Merry is not present there in the book, Pippin does not kill a troll as he does in the novel (instead, Aragorn does), the eagles fight and defeat some of the mounted Nazgûl (while Frodo putting on the One Ring distracted the Nazgûl, who raced away to Mount Doom in the book before a confrontation could occur), and Aragorn kills the Mouth of Sauron in the extended edition of the film but not in the book.[16] There was an even larger change planned: Sauron himself would come out in physical form to battle Aragorn, who would only be saved by the destruction of the Ring. Jackson eventually realised it ignored the point of Aragorn's true bravery in distracting Sauron's army against overwhelming odds, and a computer generated Troll was placed over footage of Sauron in the finished film. In the book, after the destruction of the Ring the spirit of Sauron rises like a black cloud from the ruin of Barad-dûr before being blown away by the wind, but in the film the Eye of Sauron erupts in flame and then explodes as Barad-dûr collapses. As in all of Jackson's Middle-earth adaptions, the eagles do not speak. During the Battle for Minas Tirith, the White Tree of Gondor is shown to bear one white blossom, thus blooming by itself at Aragorn's coronation. Thereby the film ignores the book's story where Gandalf shows Aragorn a seedling of the tree up in the mountains which is then planted in the courtyard. Although the film runs for another approximately 20 minutes after the climactic Downfall of Barad-dûr, many following events from the book are omitted in the film, such as the camp at the Field of Cormallen, Aragorn's business in Minas Tirith, Aragorn and Arwen's wedding, Galadriel and Celeborn being present at the ceremonies and their subsequent travelling along the company, Théoden's funeral at Edoras, the complete journey back to the Shire with stays at Rivendell and Bree, and the Scouring of the Shire, which was always seen by the screenwriters as anti-climactic.[16] Aragorn's coronation takes place in form of a great ceremony in the Citadel of Minas Tirith, opposed to the book, where Aragorn is crowned in his tent on the Pelennor Fields before entering the City. Since the "Scouring of the Shire" is omitted in the film, the conditions in the Shire haven't worsened during the Hobbits' absence. Thus, the book's restoring of the conditions and Sam's embellishment work using Galadriel's gift don't appear in the film. In the book, Frodo and Sam head for the Grey Havens not before travelling to the Woody End and meeting Galadriel, Elrond and Bilbo there, with Gandalf already waiting at Mithlond and Merry and Pippin arriving there just in time to say farewell to Frodo. In the film, however, the Hobbits and Gandalf don't travel to the Woody End, but straight to Mithlond, to find the Elves waiting there, including Celeborn who, in the book, isn't present due to his staying in Middle-Earth. Furthermore, the film doesn't explicitly reveal that Gandalf is carrying Narya, one of the Three Rings. When Sam returns to the Shire he isn't shown to live in Bag End (where he dwells with Rose in the book), but in an unknown Hobbit-hole. Production[edit] The Lord of the Rings film trilogy is unusual in that it was, up until the release of Jackson's prequel trilogy The Hobbit, the only series whose separate instalments were written and shot simultaneously (excluding pick up shoots). Jackson found The Return of the King the easiest of the films to make, because it contained the climax of the story, unlike the other two films.[19] The Return of the King was originally the second of two planned films under Miramax from January 1997 to August 1998,[20] and more or less in its finished structure as the first film was to end with The Two Towers' Battle of Helm's Deep.[21] Filming took place under multiple units across New Zealand, between 11 October 1999 and 22 December 2000, with pick up shoots for six weeks in 2003 before the film's release. Design[edit] Main article: Production design of The Lord of the Rings film series The city of Minas Tirith was built from parts of the set of Helm's Deep, while the wide shots were from miniatures. Middle-earth as envisioned by Jackson was primarily designed by Alan Lee and John Howe, former Tolkien illustrators, and created by Weta Workshop, who handled all the trilogy's weapons, armour, miniatures, prosthetics and creatures, as well as the Art Department which built the sets. Richard Taylor headed Weta, while Grant Major and Dan Hennah organised the planning and building respectively. The city of Minas Tirith, glimpsed briefly in both the previous two films, is seen fully in this film, and with it the Gondorian civilisation. The enormous soundstage was built at Dry Creek Quarry, outside Wellington, from the Helm's Deep set. That set's gate became Minas Tirith's second, while the Hornburg exterior became that of the Extended Edition's scene where Gandalf confronts the Witch-king. New structures included the 8m tall Gate, with broken and unbroken versions, with a working opening and closing mechanism, with its engravings inspired by the Baptistry of San Giovanni. There were also four levels of streets with heraldic motifs for every house, as inspired by Siena.[22] There was also the Citadel, the exterior of which was in the Stone Street Studios backlot, using forced perspective. It contains the withered White Tree, built from polystyrene by Brian Massey and the Greens Department with real branches, influenced by ancient and gnarled Lebanese olive trees. The interior was within a three-story former factory in Wellington, and colour wise is influenced by Charlemagne's Chapel, with a throne for Denethor carved from stone and polystyrene statues of past Kings. The Gondorian armour is designed to represent an evolution from the Númenóreans of the first film's prologue, with a simplified sea bird motif. 16th-century Italian and German armour served as inspiration,[23] while civilians wear silver and blacks as designed by Ngila Dickson, continuing an ancient/medieval Mediterranean Basin look.[24] Minas Morgul, the Staircase and Tower of Cirith Ungol as well as Shelob's Lair were designed by Howe, with the Morgul road using forced perspective into a bluescreened miniature. Howe's design of Minas Morgul was inspired from the experience of having a wisdom tooth pulled out: in the same way, the Orcs have put their twisted designs on to a former Gondorian city.[25] Cirith Ungol was based on Tolkien's design, but when Richard Taylor felt it as "boring", it was redesigned with more tipping angles.[26] The interior set, like Minas Tirith, was built as a few multiple levels that numerous camera takes would suggest a larger structure.[22] The third film introduces the enormous spider Shelob. Shelob was designed in 1999,[26] with the body based on a tunnelweb spider and the head with numerous growths selected by Peter Jackson's children from one of many sculpts. Jackson himself took great joy in planning the sequence, being an arachnophobe himself.[23] Shelob's Lair was inspired by sandstone and sculpted from the existing Caverns of Isengard set.[22] The Return of the King also brings into focus the Dead Men of Dunharrow and the evil Haradrim from the south of Middle-earth, men who ride the mûmakil. The Dead Men have a Celtic influence, as well as lines and symmetry to reflect their morbid state,[22] while their underground city is influenced by Petra.[25] The Haradrim were highly influenced by African culture, until Philippa Boyens expressed concern over the possibility of offensiveness, so the finished characters instead bear influence from Kiribati, in terms of weaving armour from bamboo, and the Aztecs, in use of jewellery. Also built was a single dead mûmak.[23] Other minor cultures include the Corsairs, with an exotic, swarthy look, and the Grey Havens, Elven structures adapted to stone, with influence from J. M. W. Turner paintings.[26] Principal photography[edit] The Return of the King was shot during 2000, though Astin's coverage from Gollum's attempt to separate Frodo and Sam was filmed on 24 November 1999, when floods in Queenstown interrupted the focus on The Fellowship of the Ring.[12] Some of the earliest scenes shot for the film were in fact the last. Hobbiton, home of the Hobbits, was shot in January 2000 with early scenes from The Fellowship of the Ring, with the exterior shot at a Matamata farm, while interior scenes shot at Stone Street Studios in Wellington,[27] shared with the Grey Havens sequence. Due to the high emotions of filming the scene, the cast were in despair when they were required to shoot it three times, due to a continuity flaw in Sean Astin's costume, and then negatives producing out-of-focus reels.[12] Also shared with the previous films was the Rivendell interior in May. The Battle of the Black Gate was filmed in April[28] at the Rangipo Desert, a former minefield.[29][30] New Zealand soldiers were hired as extras while guides were on the lookout for unexploded mines. Also a cause for concern were Monaghan and Boyd's scale doubles during a charge sequence. In the meantime, Wood, Astin and Serkis filmed at Mount Ruapehu for the Mount Doom exteriors. In particular, they spent two hours shooting Sam lifting Frodo on to his back with cross-camera coverage.[12] Scenes shot in June were the Paths of the Dead across various locations, including Pinnacles.[28] In July the crew shot some Shelob scenes, and in August and September time was spent on the scenes in Isengard. Monaghan and Boyd tried numerous takes of their entrance, stressing the word "weed" as they smoked pipe-weed. Christopher Lee spent his part of his scene mostly alone, though McKellen and Hill arrived on the first day for a few lines to help.[12] Edoras exteriors were shot in October. The Ride of the Rohirrim, where Théoden leads the charge into the Orc army, was filmed in Twizel with 150 extras on horseback. The Battle of the Pelennor Fields has more extensive use of computer-generated imagery, in contrast to the more extensive use of live action in the Battle of Helm's Deep in the second film. Also filmed were the attempts by Faramir to recapture Osgiliath,[31] as were scenes in the city itself.[32] At this point production was very hectic, with Jackson moving around ten units per day, and production finally wrapped on the Minas Tirith sets, as well as second units shooting parts of the siege. Just as the Hobbit actors' first scene was hiding from a Ringwraith under a tree, their last scene was the bluescreened reaction shot of the inhabitants of Minas Tirith bowing to them.[12] Pick-ups[edit] The 2003 pick-ups were filmed in the Wellington studio car park, with many parts of sets and blue-screens used to finish off scenes, which the design team had to work 24 hours to get the right sets ready for a particular day.[22] The shoot continued for two months, and became an emotional time of farewells for the cast and crew. The film has the most extensive list of re-shoots given for the trilogy. Jackson took his time to re-shoot Aragorn's coronation, rushed into a single day under second unit director Geoff Murphy on 21 December 2000. Jackson also re-shot scenes in and around Mount Doom,[12] and Théoden's death, right after Bernard Hill was meant to wrap.[18] There was also the new character of Gothmog. This was a major new design addition for the film, as Jackson felt the Mordor Orcs were "pathetic" compared to the Uruk-hai of the second film after watching assembly cuts, and thus Weta created grotesque new "über Orcs" as antagonists for the audience to focus on. Christian Rivers also redesigned the Witch-king and all of his scenes were re-shot, because of confusion from non-readers over whether or not Sauron was on the battlefield.[23] With the positive response to Bloom, Legolas was given a fight with a mûmak,[33] and Howard Shore also appeared in a cameo during Legolas and Gimli's drinking game at Edoras.[34] The final scenes shot were Aragorn escaping the Skull avalanche, and Frodo finishing his book. The cast also received various props associated with their characters, although John Rhys-Davies burned his final Gimli prosthetic. Viggo Mortensen headbutted the stunt team goodbye.[12] Pick-ups ended on 27 June 2003.[33] Scenes shot afterwards included various live-action shots of Riders for the Battle of the Pelennor Fields and a reaction shot of Serkis as Gollum finally realises Frodo intends to destroy the Ring, shot in Jackson's house.[35] For the Extended DVD, in March 2004 Jackson created a few shots of skulls rolling over for the avalanche scene; this was the final piece of footage ever shot for the trilogy, and Jackson noted that it must be the first time a director had shot scenes for a film after it had already won the Oscar.[36] Editing[edit] Post-production began in November 2002, with the completion of the 4½ hour assembly cut of the film that Annie Collins had been completing over 2001 and 2002, from 4-hour dailies. For example, Théoden leading the charge went from 150 minutes of takes to a finished 90 seconds.[37] Jackson reunited with longtime collaborator Jamie Selkirk to edit the final film. Like The Two Towers, they would have to deal with multiple storylines, and Jackson paid attention to each storyline at a time before deciding where to intercut. Most importantly they spent three weeks working on the last 45 minutes of the film,[35] for appropriate intercutting and leaving out scenes such as the Mouth of Sauron, and the fates of characters like Legolas, Gimli, Éowyn and Faramir.[16] The film inherited scenes originally planned to go into the second film, including the reforging of Narsil, Gollum's backstory, and Saruman's exit. But the Saruman scene posed a structural problem: killing off the second film's villain when the plot has Sauron as the main villain.[35] Despite pick-ups and dubs, the scene was cut, causing controversy with fans and Saruman actor Christopher Lee, as well as a petition to restore the scene.[38] Lee nonetheless contributed to the DVDs and was at the Copenhagen premiere, although, on the other hand, he says he will never understand the reason for the cut and his relationship with Jackson is chilly.[39] They would, however, later reconcile upon Lee's casting in Jackson's Hobbit films. Jackson only had a lock on 5 out of 10 reels, and had to churn out 3 reels in 3 weeks to help finish the film. It was finally completed on 12 November 2003.[40] Jackson never had a chance to view the film in full due to the hectic schedule, and only saw the film from beginning to end on 1 December at the Wellington premiere; according to Elijah Wood, his response was "yup, it's good, pretty good".[36] Visual effects[edit] Main article: Special effects of The Lord of the Rings film series The Return of the King contains 1,488 visual effect shots, nearly three times the number from the first film and almost twice that of the second. Visual effects work began with Alan Lee and Mark Lewis compositing various photographs of New Zealand landscape to create the digital arena of the Pelennor Fields in November 2002. Gary Horsfield also created a digital version of the Barad-dûr during his Christmas break at home by himself, for the film's climax. In the meantime, Jackson and Christian Rivers used computers to plan the enormous battle up until February 2003, when the shots were shown to Weta Digital. To their astonishment, 60 planned shots had gone up to 250, and 50,000 characters were now 200,000.[41] Nevertheless, they pressed on, soon delivering 100 shots a week, 20 a day, and as the deadline neared within the last two months, often working until 2 am.[40] For the battle, they recorded 450 motions for the MASSIVE digital horses (though deaths were animated), and also had to deal with late additions in the film, such as Trolls bursting through Minas Tirith's gates as well as the creatures that pull Grond to the gate,[23] and redoing a shot of two mûmakil Éomer takes down that had originally taken six months in two days. On a similar note of digital creatures, Shelob's head sculpture was scanned by a Canadian company for 10 times more detail than Weta had previously been able to capture.[41] Like the previous films, there are also extensive morphs between digital doubles for the actors. This time, there was Sam falling off Shelob, where the morph takes place as Astin hits the ground. Legolas attacking a mûmak required numerous transitions to and fro, and Gollum's shots of him having recovered the One Ring and falling into the Crack of Doom were fully animated.[41] The King of the Dead is played by an actor in prosthetics, and his head occasionally morphs to a more skull-like digital version, depending on the character's mood. The Mouth of Sauron also had his mouth enlarged 200% for unsettling effect.[22] The Return of the King also has practical effects. In the Pyre of Denethor sequence, as the Steward of Gondor throws Pippin out of the Tomb, John Noble threw a size double named Fon onto a prostrate Billy Boyd, who immediately pushed his head into camera to complete the illusion. A few burning torches were also reflected off a plate of glass and into the camera for when Gandalf's horse Shadowfax kicks Denethor onto the pyre. Because of Jackson's requirement for complete representation of his fantasy world, numerous miniatures were built, such as 1:72 scale miniature of Minas Tirith, which rises 7m high and is 6.5m in diameter. 1:14 scale sections of the city were also required, and the Extended Edition scene of the collapsing City of the Dead has 80,000 small skulls, amounting in total to a single cubic meter.[25] The miniatures team concluded in November with the Black Gate, after 1000 days of shooting, and the final digital effects shot done was the Ring's destruction, on 25 November.[40] Sound effects[edit] The Sound department spent the early part of the year searching for the right sounds. A Tasmanian devil was Shelob's shriek, which in turn gave inspiration for Weta's animators, while the mûmakil is the beginning and end of a lion roar. Human screams and a donkey screech were mixed into Sauron's fall and broken glass was used for the collapsing sounds. For missile trading during Minas Tirith's siege, construction workers dropped actual 2 ton stone blocks previously lifted by a construction crane. Mixing began at a new studio on 15 August, although unfinished building work caused some annoyances.[42] The mixers finished on 15 November, after three months of non-stop work.[40] Score[edit] Main article: The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (soundtrack) See also: Music of The Lord of the Rings film series "Into the West" (performed by Annie Lennox) Written by Fran Walsh, Howard Shore, and Annie Lennox, this selected song won the Oscar for Best Original Song at the 76th Academy Awards. It also won a Grammy for Best Film Song. Problems playing this file? See media help. The music was composed by Howard Shore, who previously composed the first two parts of the trilogy. Shore watched the assembly cut of the film,[34] and had to write seven minutes of music per day to keep up with the schedule.[40] The score sees the full introduction of the Gondor theme, originally heard during Boromir's speeches at the Council of Elrond in The Fellowship of the Ring and at Osgiliath in The Two Towers' Extended Edition. Actors Billy Boyd, Viggo Mortensen and Liv Tyler also contributed to the film's music. Boyd sings on screen as Faramir charges towards Osgiliath, Mortensen sings on screen as he is crowned King, and in the Extended Edition Tyler sings as Aragorn heals Éowyn. Renée Fleming, Ben Del Maestro and James Galway also contribute to the soundtrack. Fleming sings as Arwen has a vision of her son and when Gollum recovers the One Ring. Del Maestro sings when Gandalf lights his staff to save fleeing Gondorian soldiers from Osgiliath as the Nazgûl attack. Galway plays the flute as Frodo and Sam climb Mount Doom. The end title song, "Into the West", was composed by Shore with lyrics by Fran Walsh. Annie Lennox (formerly of Eurythmics) performed it and also received songwriting credit. The song was partially inspired by the premature death from cancer of a young New Zealand filmmaker named Cameron Duncan who had befriended Peter Jackson.[34] Release[edit] After two years of attention and acclaim since the release of The Fellowship of the Ring, audience and critical anticipation for the final instalment was extremely high. The world premiere was held in Wellington's Embassy Theatre, on 1 December 2003, and was attended by the director and many of the stars. It was estimated that over 100,000 people lined the streets, more than a quarter of the city's population.[43] Home media[edit] The theatrical edition of the film was released on VHS and DVD in May 2004. The DVD was a 2-disc set with extras on the second disc. The theatrical DVD sets for the two previous films were released eight months after the films were released, but Return of the King's set was completed in five because it did not have to market a sequel (the previous films had to wait for footage of their sequels to become available for a ten-minute preview). However, it contained a seven-minute trailer of the entire trilogy. The Return of the King followed the precedent set by its predecessors by releasing an Extended Edition (251 minutes) with new editing and added special effects and music, along with four commentaries and six hours of supplementary material, plus 10 minutes of fan-club credits. However, this set took longer to produce than the others because the cast and crew, no longer based in New Zealand for the trilogy, were spread all over the world working on other projects.[44] The set was finally released in December 2004 in the UK and US. The final ten minutes comprises a listing of the charter members of the official fan club who had paid for three-year charter membership. A collectors' box set was also released, which included the Extended Set plus a sculpture of Minas Tirith and a bonus 50-minute music documentary DVD, Howard Shore: Creating The Lord of the Rings Symphony: A Composer's Journey Through Middle-earth. The DVD has a DTS-ES soundtrack. The DVD also features two humorous Easter Eggs, one where Dominic Monaghan plays a German interviewer with Elijah Wood via satellite and another where Vince Vaughn and Ben Stiller attempt to convince Jackson to make a sequel, originally shown at the 2004 MTV Movie Awards. Both can be accessed via a Ring icon on the last page of both Disc 1 and 2's scene indexes. In August 2006, a Limited Edition of The Return of the King was released. This Limited Edition contains two discs; the first is a two-sided DVD containing both the Theatrical and Extended editions of the film. The second disc is a bonus disc that contains a new behind-the-scenes documentary. The theatrical Blu-ray release was released in the United States in April 2010.[45] The individual Blu-ray disc of The Return of the King was released in September 2010 with the same special features as the complete trilogy release, except there was no digital copy.[46] The Extended Edition was released in the United States in June 2011.[47] It has a runtime of 263 minutes.[48] Reception[edit] Box office[edit] The film earned $377,845,905 in the United States and Canada and $742,083,616 in other countries for a worldwide total of $1,119,929,521. Worldwide, it is the 14th highest-grossing film when not adjusted for inflation,[49] the highest-grossing film of 2003,[50] and the highest-grossing instalment in The Lord of the Rings trilogy.[51] It was the second film in history to earn over $1 billion, making it the second highest-grossing film at the time. Box Office Mojo estimates that the film had sold over 61 million tickets in the US in its initial theatrical run.[52] In the US and Canada, it is the 27th highest-grossing film,[53] the highest-grossing 2003 film,[54] and the highest-grossing installment in The Lord of the Rings trilogy.[51] The film set an opening Wednesday record with $34.5 million.[55] This record was first surpassed by Spider-Man 2 and ranks as the seventh largest Wednesday opening.[56] The film opened a day earlier for a midnight showing and accounted for about $8 million. This was nearly twice the first-day total of The Fellowship of the Ring — which earned $18.2 million on its opening day in 2001 — as well as a significant increase over The Two Towers — which earned $26.1 million on its debut in 2002. Part of the grosses came from the Trilogy Tuesday event, in which the Extended Editions of the two previous films were played on 16 December before the first midnight screening. It went on to make an opening weekend of $72.6 million ($124.1 million with weekday previews).[57] Its Friday-Sunday opening weekend was a record-high for December (first surpassed by I Am Legend).[58] The film also set single-day records for Christmas Day and New Year's Day (both first surpassed by Meet the Fockers).[59][60] Outside the US and Canada, it is the 17th highest-grossing film,[61] the highest-grossing 2003 film[62] and the highest-grossing film of the series.[51] On its first day (Wednesday, 17 December 2003), the film earned $23.5 million from 19 countries[55] and it set an opening-weekend record outside the US and Canada with $125.9 million during the 5-day weekend as a whole.[63] It set opening-day records in 13 of them, including the United Kingdom, Germany, Austria, Belgium, the Netherlands, Spain, Greece, Switzerland, Scandinavia (as well as separately in Sweden, Finland, Norway, and Denmark), Mexico, Chile, and Puerto Rico.[55][63] It set opening-weekend records in the United Kingdom ($26.5 million in five days), Germany, Spain, Sweden, Denmark, and Switzerland. In New Zealand, where filming took place, the film set opening day, opening weekend, single-day, Friday gross, Saturday gross, and Sunday gross records with $1.7 million in four days.[63] The substantial increase in initial box office totals caused optimistic studio executives to forecast that The Return of the King would surpass The Two Towers in total earnings. If this proved to be true, then this would be the first blockbuster movie trilogy for each successive film to earn more at the box office than its predecessor, when all three films were blockbuster successes. The Return of the King has helped The Lord of the Rings franchise to become the highest-grossing motion picture trilogy worldwide of all time with $2,917,506,956, beating other notable ones such as the Star Wars trilogies,[64] and surviving from being out-grossed by subsequent trilogies like Pirates of the Caribbean and Harry Potter, despite ticket price inflation. These figures do not include income from DVD sales, TV rights, etc. It has been estimated[65] that the gross income from non-box office sales and merchandise has been at least equal to the box office for all three films. If this is so, the total gross income for the trilogy would be in the region of $6 billion following an investment of $300 million ($426 million including marketing costs). Critical response[edit] The Return of the King holds a 95% "Fresh" rating on the aggregate review site Rotten Tomatoes, based on 262 reviews, with an average score of 8.7/10. The site's main consensus reads "Visually breathtaking and emotionally powerful, The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King is a moving and satisfying conclusion to a great trilogy".[66] The film holds a score of 94 out of 100 on Metacritic, based on 41 reviews, indicating "universal acclaim".[67] Roger Ebert of the Chicago Sun-Times gave three and a half stars out of four saying, ""Return of the King" is such a crowning achievement, such a visionary use of all the tools of special effects, such a pure spectacle, that it can be enjoyed even by those who have not seen the first two films."[68] Richard Corliss of Time named it the best film of the year.[69] The main criticism of The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King was its running time, particularly the epilogue; even rave reviews for the film commented on its length. Joel Siegel of Good Morning America said in his review for the film (which he gave an 'A'): "If it didn't take forty-five minutes to end, it'd be my best picture of the year. As it is, it's just one of the great achievements in film history."[70] There was also criticism regarding the Army of the Dead's appearance, rapidly ending the Battle of the Pelennor Fields.[71] In February 2004, a few months following release, the film was voted as No. 8 on Empire's 100 Greatest Movies of All Time, compiled from readers' top 10 lists. This forced the magazine to abandon its policy of only allowing films being older than 12 months to be eligible.[72] In 2007, Total Film named The Return of the King the third best film of the past decade (Total Film's publication time), behind The Matrix and Fight Club.[73] In CinemaScore polls conducted during the opening weekend, cinema audiences gave the film an average grade of "A+" on an A+ to F scale.[74] Accolades[edit] Academy Awards 1. Best Picture 2. Best Director 3. Best Adapted Screenplay 4. Best Original Score 5. Best Original Song 6. Best Visual Effects 7. Best Art Direction 8. Best Costume Design 9. Best Make-up 10. Best Sound Mixing 11. Best Film Editing Main article: List of accolades received by The Lord of the Rings film series The film was nominated for eleven Academy Awards: Best Picture, Best Director, Best Adapted Screenplay, Best Original Score, Best Original Song, Best Visual Effects, Best Art Direction, Best Costume Design, Best Make-up, Best Sound Mixing and Best Film Editing. At the 76th Academy Awards in 2004, the film won all the categories for which it was nominated and it holds the record for highest Academy Award totals along with Titanic and Ben Hur.[75] The film also won four Golden Globes (including Best Picture for Drama and Best Director),[76][77][78] five BAFTAs, two MTV Movie Awards, two Grammy Awards, nine Saturn Awards, the New York Film Critics Circle award for Best Picture, the Nebula Award for Best Script, and the Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form. The film was nominated for the 10th Anniversary Edition of AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies.[79] See also[edit] Book: The Lord of the Rings film trilogy Middle-earth portal Book: The Lord of the Rings film series The Hobbit (film series) The Hobbit (1977 film) The Lord of the Rings (1978 film) The Return of the King (1980 film) List of films considered the best List of Academy Award records References[edit] ^ "THE LORD OF THE RINGS – THE RETURN OF THE KING". British Board of Film Classification. Retrieved 4 July 2015.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings The Return of the King". British Film Institute. Retrieved 27 November 2016.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings The Return of the King (2003)". American Film Institute. Retrieved 6 December 2012.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings The Return of the King (2003)". Turner Classic Movies. Retrieved 6 December 2012.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings The Return of the King (2003)". AllMovie. Retrieved 6 December 2012.  }} ^ a b "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 3 February 2009.  ^ "Top 25 Holiday Movies of All-Time". IGN.  ^ "'Lord' rings true / Tolkien's epic fantasy springs to wondrous life onscreen". The San Francisco Chronicle. 30 December 2001.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King Movie Reviews, Pictures, Trailers". Rotten Tomatoes. Retrieved 24 March 2010.  ^ Deke Parsons (31 October 2014). J.R.R. Tolkien, Robert E. Howard and the Birth of Modern Fantasy. McFarland. p. 22. ISBN 978-0-7864-9537-5.  ^ "With Tolkien's Help, a Holiday Record for Films". The New York Times. Associated Press. 29 December 2003. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013. Retrieved 7 September 2008.  ^ a b c d e f g h Cameras in Middle-earth: Filming the Return of the King (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ Dowling, Stephen (17 December 2003). "Tolkien relative's kingly role". BBC News online. Retrieved 20 October 2006.  ^ "Perry Miniatures". Retrieved 18 June 2007.  ^ Ian McKellen (2004). Cast Commentary (DVD). New Line Cinema.  ^ a b c d e f g h i j Finding the Story: Forging the Final Chapter (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ Sibley, Brian (2006). Peter Jackson: A Film-maker's Journey. London: Harpercollins. p. 345. ISBN 0-00-717558-2.  ^ a b Peter Jackson, Fran Walsh and Philippa Boyens (2004). Director/Writers' Special Extended Edition commentary (DVD). New Line Cinema.  ^ Lee, Alana. "Peter Jackson on The Return of the King". BBC Films. Retrieved 20 October 2006.  ^ Watkin, Tim (12 August 2001). "The 'Rings' movies, a potted history". New Zealand Herald. Retrieved 20 October 2006.  ^ "20 Questions with Peter Jackson". Peter Jackson online transcript from Ain't It Cool News. Retrieved 24 October 2006.  ^ a b c d e f Designing and Building Middle-earth (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ a b c d e Weta Workshop (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ Ngila Dickson (2004). Costume Design (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema.  ^ a b c Big-atures (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ a b c Russell, Gary (2004). The Lord of the Rings: The Art of the Return of the King. Harpercollins. ISBN 0-00-713565-3.  ^ Cameras in Middle-earth: Filming the Fellowship of the Ring (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2002.  ^ a b "Tehanu" (11 October 2000). "One Year of Principal Photography". The One Ring.net. Retrieved 22 October 2006.  ^ Samantha Sofka (15 March 2015). "Peter Jackson Filmed Part of RETURN OF THE KING on a Mine Field". nerdist.com. Retrieved 23 March 2016.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003 Filming Locations". imdb.com. Retrieved 23 March 2016.  ^ Home of the Horse Lords (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ Davidson, Paul (14 November 2000). "A Slew of The Lord of the Rings news". IGN. Retrieved 24 October 2006.  ^ a b Davidson, Paul (27 June 2003). "A new Return of the King poster". IGN. Retrieved 21 October 2006.  ^ a b c Music for Middle-earth (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ a b c Editorial: Completing the Trilogy (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ a b The Passing of an Age (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ Sibley, Brian (2002). The Lord of the Rings: The Making of the Movie Trilogy. Harpercollins. 158. ISBN 0-00-713567-X.  ^ "Rings director cuts wizard scenes". BBC News online. 12 November 2003. Retrieved 17 October 2006.  ^ Wootton, Dan (30 April 2006). "I will never forgive Jackson, says LOTR actor". New Zealand Herald. Retrieved 17 October 2006.  ^ a b c d e The End of All Things (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ a b c Weta Digital (Special Extended Edition documentary) (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ The Soundscapes of Middle-earth (DVD). New Line Cinema. 2004.  ^ Mercer, Phil (1 December 2003). "How hobbits took over NZ's capital". BBC News. Retrieved 24 March 2010.  ^ Gary Susman (9 June 2004). "Hobbits for the Holidays". Entertainment Weekly. Retrieved 17 February 2007.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Motion Picture Trilogy Blu-ray: Theatrical Editions". Blu-ray.com. Retrieved 18 February 2010.  ^ Calogne, Juan (23 June 2010). "Lord of the Rings Movies Get Separate Blu-ray editions". Blu-ray.com. Retrieved 28 November 2010.  ^ "Lord of the Rings Pre-order Now Available". Amazon.com. 31 May 2011. Retrieved 31 May 2011.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King". IMDb.com. Retrieved 26 November 2012.  ^ "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "2003 Yearly Box Office Results – Box Office Mojo". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ a b c "The Lord of the Rings". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003)". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved May 31, 2016.  ^ "All Time Domestic Box Office Results". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "2003 Yearly Box Office Results – Box Office Mojo". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ a b c Gray, Brandon (18 December 2003). "'Return of the King' Rakes in $57.6M Worldwide on Opening Day". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 20 June 2012.  ^ "Opening Wednesday Records at the Box Office". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 15 June 2011.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 15 June 2011.  ^ "Top December Opening Weekends at the Box Office". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "Single Day Records: High Grossing Movies on Christmas Day". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "Single Day Records: High Grossing Movies on New Year's Day". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "All Time Worldwide Box Office Grosses". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ "2003 Overseas Total Yearly Box Office Results". boxofficemojo.com.  ^ a b c Gray, Brandon (22 December 2003). "'King' of the World: $250M in 5 Days". Box Office Mojo. Retrieved 20 June 2012.  ^ "Top Box Office Earning Trilogies Worldwide". Box Office Mojo.com. Retrieved 10 February 2007.  ^ "Time Warner: New Line Cinema". timewarner.com. 2 August 2006. Archived from the original on 26 January 2007.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King". Flixster. Retrieved 22 January 2013.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King". Metacritic. Retrieved 1 February 2013.  ^ "The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Roger Ebert's review". www.rogerebert.com. Retrieved 1 February 2013.  ^ Richard Corliss (18 December 2003). "The Best Movies". Time. Retrieved 9 November 2007.  ^ Joel Siegel (19 December 2003). "Jackson Brings Lord of the Rings to Historic Completion". ABC News. Retrieved 16 February 2007.  ^ "The best – and worst – movie battle scenes". CNN. 30 March 2007. Retrieved 1 April 2007.  ^ "The 100 Greatest Movies of All Time". Empire. 30 January 2004. p. 96.  ^ "Ten Greatest Films of the Past Decade". Total Film. April 2007. p. 98.  ^ "Cinemascore". Cinemascore.com. Retrieved 22 January 2015.  ^ "The 76th Academy Awards (2004) Nominees and Winners". oscars.org. Retrieved 20 November 2011.  ^ Crean, Ellen (25 January 2004). "Golden Globe Spins For 'Rings'". CBS News. Retrieved 10 March 2011.  ^ "Hail to the 'King' at Golden Globes". MSNBC. 26 January 2004. Retrieved 10 March 2011.  ^ Armstrong, Mark (25 January 2004). "'Rings,' 'Translation' Rule the Globes". People. Retrieved 10 March 2011.  ^ AFI's 100 Years...100 Movies (10th Anniversary Edition) Ballot External links[edit] Wikiquote has quotations related to: The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (film) Official website The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King script at the Internet Movie Script Database The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at the Internet Movie Database The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at AllMovie The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at the TCM Movie Database The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at Rotten Tomatoes The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King at Box Office Mojo v t e The Lord of the Rings and The Hobbit film series The Lord of the Rings Films The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King Production Original characters (Figwit) Production design Principal photography Special effects Music The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King "Aníron" "Concerning Hobbits" "Into the West" "May It Be" "A Walking Song" Accolades The Exhibition Gollum: How We Made Movie Magic The Long and Short of It The Hobbit Films An Unexpected Journey The Desolation of Smaug The Battle of the Five Armies Production Original characters (Tauriel) Music An Unexpected Journey The Desolation of Smaug The Battle of the Five Armies "I See Fire" Accolades Video games The Two Towers The Return of the King The Third Age The Third Age (GBA) Tactics The Battle for Middle-earth The Battle for Middle-earth II The Battle for Middle-earth II: The Rise of the Witch-king Conquest Aragorn's Quest War in the North Lego The Lord of the Rings Guardians of Middle-earth Lego The Hobbit Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor v t e J. R. R. Tolkien's The Lord of the Rings The Fellowship of the Ring film soundtrack game The Two Towers film soundtrack game The Return of the King film soundtrack game Production and reception Composition Themes Influences Translations Reception Fandom Study Related works The Hobbit The Adventures of Tom Bombadil The Road Goes Ever On The Silmarillion Unfinished Tales The History of Middle-earth The History of The Lord of the Rings "Bilbo's Last Song" The Children of Húrin The History of The Hobbit The Tale of Beren and Lúthien Characters Aragorn Arwen Bilbo Boromir Butterbur Celeborn Denethor Elladan and Elrohir Elrond Éomer Éowyn Faramir Frodo Galadriel Gandalf Gildor Gimli Glorfindel Gollum Legolas Merry Mouth of Sauron Old Man Willow Pippin Radagast Sam Saruman Sauron Shelob Théoden Tom Bombadil Treebeard Witch-king Wormtongue   Adaptations and other derivative works Books Bored of the Rings (1969) The Last Ringbearer (1999) Muddle Earth (2003) Theatre Fellowship! (2005) Lord of the Rings (2006) Radio The Lord of the Rings (1955) The Lord of the Rings (1979) Hordes of the Things (1980) The Lord of the Rings (1981) Der Herr der Ringe (1992) Film Animated The Lord of the Rings (1978) The Return of the King (1980) Peter Jackson trilogy The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) Fan-made The Hunt for Gollum (2009) Born of Hope (2009) Video games Journey to Rivendell Game One Game Two: Shadows of Mordor War in Middle Earth Vol. I (1990) Vol. I (SNES) J. R. R. Tolkien's Riders of Rohan Elendor Volume II Kingdom O' Magic The Fellowship of the Ring The Two Towers The Return of the King War of the Ring The Third Age The Battle for Middle-earth Tactics The Battle for Middle-earth II The Rise of the Witch-king The Lord of the Rings Online Mines of Moria Siege of Mirkwood Rise of Isengard Riders of Rohan Helm's Deep Conquest Aragorn's Quest War in the North Lego The Lord of the Rings Guardians of Middle-earth Middle-earth: Shadow of Mordor Tabletop roleplaying games The Lord of the Rings Roleplaying Game Middle-earth Role Playing The One Ring Roleplaying Game Other games Middle Earth (board game) Lord of the Rings (board game) Risk: The Lord of the Rings Trilogy Edition (board game) War of the Ring (board game) The Lord of the Rings Strategy Battle Game The Lord of the Rings: The Card Game The Lord of the Rings Trading Card Game Middle-earth Collectible Card Game Toys Middle-earth Lego sets v t e Middle-earth in film Animated films The Hobbit (1977) The Lord of the Rings (1978) The Return of the King (1980) Live-action films Sagan om ringen (1971) The Hobbit (1985) Hobitit (1993) Peter Jackson series The Lord of the Rings The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Two Towers (2002) The Return of the King (2003) The Hobbit An Unexpected Journey (2012) The Desolation of Smaug (2013) The Battle of the Five Armies (2014) Fan films The Hunt for Gollum (2009) Born of Hope (2009) Book Category v t e Peter Jackson Films directed Bad Taste (1987) Meet the Feebles (1989) Braindead (1992) Heavenly Creatures (1994) The Frighteners (1996) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) King Kong (2005) The Lovely Bones (2009) The Hobbit: An Unexpected Journey (2012) The Hobbit: The Desolation of Smaug (2013) The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies (2014) Other films The Valley (1976) Forgotten Silver (1995) Crossing the Line (2008) Produced only Valley of the Stereos (1992) Jack Brown Genius (1997, also writer) District 9 (2009) The Adventures of Tintin (2011) West of Memphis (2012) Companies Weta Workshop Weta Digital Park Road Post Related The Lord of the Rings (film series) The Hobbit (film series)   Awards for The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King v t e Academy Award for Best Picture 1927/28–1950 Wings (1927/28) The Broadway Melody (1928/29) All Quiet on the Western Front (1929/30) Cimarron (1930/31) Grand Hotel (1931/32) Cavalcade (1933) It Happened One Night (1934) Mutiny on the Bounty (1935) The Great Ziegfeld (1936) The Life of Emile Zola (1937) You Can't Take It with You (1938) Gone with the Wind (1939) Rebecca (1940) How Green Was My Valley (1941) Mrs. Miniver (1942) Casablanca (1943) Going My Way (1944) The Lost Weekend (1945) The Best Years of Our Lives (1946) Gentleman's Agreement (1947) Hamlet (1948) All the King's Men (1949) All About Eve (1950) 1951–1975 An American in Paris (1951) The Greatest Show on Earth (1952) From Here to Eternity (1953) On the Waterfront (1954) Marty (1955) Around the World in 80 Days (1956) The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957) Gigi (1958) Ben-Hur (1959) The Apartment (1960) West Side Story (1961) Lawrence of Arabia (1962) Tom Jones (1963) My Fair Lady (1964) The Sound of Music (1965) A Man for All Seasons (1966) In the Heat of the Night (1967) Oliver! (1968) Midnight Cowboy (1969) Patton (1970) The French Connection (1971) The Godfather (1972) The Sting (1973) The Godfather Part II (1974) One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975) 1976–2000 Rocky (1976) Annie Hall (1977) The Deer Hunter (1978) Kramer vs. Kramer (1979) Ordinary People (1980) Chariots of Fire (1981) Gandhi (1982) Terms of Endearment (1983) Amadeus (1984) Out of Africa (1985) Platoon (1986) The Last Emperor (1987) Rain Man (1988) Driving Miss Daisy (1989) Dances with Wolves (1990) The Silence of the Lambs (1991) Unforgiven (1992) Schindler's List (1993) Forrest Gump (1994) Braveheart (1995) The English Patient (1996) Titanic (1997) Shakespeare in Love (1998) American Beauty (1999) Gladiator (2000) 2001–present A Beautiful Mind (2001) Chicago (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) Million Dollar Baby (2004) Crash (2005) The Departed (2006) No Country for Old Men (2007) Slumdog Millionaire (2008) The Hurt Locker (2009) The King's Speech (2010) The Artist (2011) Argo (2012) 12 Years a Slave (2013) Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) (2014) Spotlight (2015) Moonlight (2016) v t e BAFTA Award for Best Film Best Film from Any Source 1947–1967 The Best Years of Our Lives (1947) Hamlet (1948) Bicycle Thieves (1949) All About Eve (1950) La Ronde (1951) The Sound Barrier (1952) Forbidden Games (1953) The Wages of Fear (1954) Richard III (1955) Gervaise (1956) The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957) Room at the Top (1958) Ben-Hur (1959) The Apartment (1960) Ballad of a Soldier (1961) The Hustler (1961) Lawrence of Arabia (1962) Tom Jones (1963) Dr. Strangelove or: How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Bomb (1964) My Fair Lady (1965) Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf? (1966) A Man for All Seasons (1967) Best Film 1968–present The Graduate (1968) Midnight Cowboy (1969) Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid (1970) Sunday Bloody Sunday (1971) Cabaret (1972) Day for Night (1973) Lacombe, Lucien (1974) Alice Doesn't Live Here Anymore (1975) One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1976) Annie Hall (1977) Julia (1978) Manhattan (1979) The Elephant Man (1980) Chariots of Fire (1981) Gandhi (1982) Educating Rita (1983) The Killing Fields (1984) The Purple Rose of Cairo (1985) A Room with a View (1986) Jean de Florette (1987) The Last Emperor (1988) Dead Poets Society (1989) Goodfellas (1990) The Commitments (1991) Howards End (1992) Schindler's List (1993) Four Weddings and a Funeral (1994) Sense and Sensibility (1995) The English Patient (1996) The Full Monty (1997) Shakespeare in Love (1998) American Beauty (1999) Gladiator (2000) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Pianist (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) The Aviator (2004) Brokeback Mountain (2005) The Queen (2006) Atonement (2007) Slumdog Millionaire (2008) The Hurt Locker (2009) The King's Speech (2010) The Artist (2011) Argo (2012) 12 Years a Slave (2013) Boyhood (2014) The Revenant (2015) La La Land (2016) v t e Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Picture Sense and Sensibility (1995) Fargo (1996) L.A. Confidential (1997) Saving Private Ryan (1998) American Beauty (1999) Gladiator (2000) A Beautiful Mind (2001) Chicago (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) Sideways (2004) Brokeback Mountain (2005) The Departed (2006) No Country for Old Men (2007) Slumdog Millionaire (2008) The Hurt Locker (2009) The Social Network (2010) The Artist (2011) Argo (2012) 12 Years a Slave (2013) Boyhood (2014) Spotlight (2015) La La Land (2016) v t e Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Acting Ensemble (2001–2009) Gosford Park (2001): Eileen Atkins, Bob Balaban, Alan Bates, Charles Dance, Stephen Fry, Michael Gambon, Richard E. Grant, Tom Hollander, Derek Jacobi, Kelly Macdonald, Helen Mirren, Jeremy Northam, Clive Owen, Ryan Phillippe, Maggie Smith, Geraldine Somerville, Kristin Scott Thomas, Sophie Thompson, Emily Watson, James Wilby Chicago (2002): Christine Baranski, Ekaterina Shchelkanova, Taye Diggs, Denise Faye, Colm Feore, Richard Gere, Deidre Goodwin, Queen Latifah, Lucy Liu, Susan Misner, M?a, John C. Reilly, Dominic West, Renée Zellweger, Catherine Zeta-Jones The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003): Sean Astin, Sean Bean, Cate Blanchett, Orlando Bloom, Billy Boyd, Bernard Hill, Ian Holm, Ian McKellen, Dominic Monaghan, Viggo Mortensen, John Noble, Miranda Otto, John Rhys-Davies, Andy Serkis, Liv Tyler, Karl Urban, Hugo Weaving, David Wenham, Elijah Wood Sideways (2004): Thomas Haden Church, Paul Giamatti, Virginia Madsen, Sandra Oh Crash (2005): Christopher "Ludacris" Bridges, Sandra Bullock, Don Cheadle, Matt Dillon, Jennifer Esposito, William Fichtner, Brendan Fraser, Terrence Howard, Thandie Newton, Ryan Phillippe, Larenz Tate Little Miss Sunshine (2006): Alan Arkin, Abigail Breslin, Steve Carell, Toni Collette, Paul Dano, Greg Kinnear Hairspray (2007): Nikki Blonsky, Amanda Bynes, Paul Dooley, Zac Efron, Allison Janney, Elijah Kelley, Queen Latifah, James Marsden, Michelle Pfeiffer, Brittany Snow, Jerry Stiller, John Travolta, Christopher Walken Milk (2008): Josh Brolin, Joseph Cross, James Franco, Victor Garber, Emile Hirsch, Diego Luna, Denis O'Hare, Sean Penn, Alison Pill Inglourious Basterds (2009): Daniel Brühl, August Diehl, Julie Dreyfus, Michael Fassbender, Sylvester Groth, Jacky Ido, Diane Kruger, Mélanie Laurent, Denis Ménochet, Mike Myers, Brad Pitt, Eli Roth, Til Schweiger, Rod Taylor, Christoph Waltz, Martin Wuttke (2010–present) The Fighter (2010): Amy Adams, Christian Bale, Melissa Leo, Jack McGee, Mark Wahlberg The Help (2011): Jessica Chastain, Viola Davis, Bryce Dallas Howard, Allison Janney, Chris Lowell, Ahna O'Reilly, Sissy Spacek, Octavia Spencer, Mary Steenburgen, Emma Stone, Cicely Tyson, Mike Vogel Silver Linings Playbook (2012): Bradley Cooper, Robert De Niro, Anupam Kher, Jennifer Lawrence, Chris Tucker, Jacki Weaver American Hustle (2013): Amy Adams, Christian Bale, Louis C.K., Bradley Cooper, Jack Huston, Jennifer Lawrence, Alessandro Nivola, Michael Peña, Jeremy Renner, Elisabeth Röhm, Shea Whigham Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) (2014): Zach Galifianakis, Michael Keaton, Edward Norton, Andrea Riseborough, Amy Ryan, Emma Stone, Naomi Watts Spotlight (2015): Billy Crudup, Brian d'Arcy James, Michael Keaton, Rachel McAdams, Mark Ruffalo, Liev Schreiber, John Slattery, Stanley Tucci Moonlight (2016): Mahershala Ali, Patrick Decile, Alex R. Hibbert, Naomie Harris, André Holland, Jharrel Jerome, Janelle Monáe, Jaden Piner, Trevante Rhodes, Ashton Sanders v t e Empire Award for Best Film Braveheart (1996) Se7en (1997) Men in Black (1998) Titanic (1999) The Matrix (2000) Gladiator (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004) The Bourne Supremacy (2005) King Kong (2006) Casino Royale (2007) The Bourne Ultimatum (2008) The Dark Knight (2009) Avatar (2010) Inception (2011) Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 (2012) Skyfall (2013) Gravity (2014) Interstellar (2015) The Revenant (2016) v t e Golden Globe Award for Best Motion Picture – Drama A Place in the Sun (1951) The Greatest Show on Earth (1952) On the Waterfront (1954) East of Eden (1955) Around the World in 80 Days (1956) The Bridge on the River Kwai (1957) The Defiant Ones (1958) Ben-Hur (1959) Spartacus (1960) The Guns of Navarone (1961) Lawrence of Arabia (1962) The Cardinal (1963) Becket (1964) Doctor Zhivago (1965) A Man for All Seasons (1966) In the Heat of the Night (1967) The Lion in Winter (1968) Anne of the Thousand Days (1969) Love Story (1970) The French Connection (1971) The Godfather (1972) The Exorcist (1973) Chinatown (1974) One Flew Over the Cuckoo's Nest (1975) Rocky (1976) The Turning Point (1977) Midnight Express (1978) Kramer vs. Kramer (1979) Ordinary People (1980) On Golden Pond (1981) E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial (1982) Terms of Endearment (1983) Amadeus (1984) Out of Africa (1985) Platoon (1986) The Last Emperor (1987) Rain Man (1988) Born on the Fourth of July (1989) Dances with Wolves (1990) Bugsy (1991) Scent of a Woman (1992) Schindler's List (1993) Forrest Gump (1994) Sense and Sensibility (1995) The English Patient (1996) Titanic (1997) Saving Private Ryan (1998) American Beauty (1999) Gladiator (2000) A Beautiful Mind (2001) The Hours (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) The Aviator (2004) Brokeback Mountain (2005) Babel (2006) Atonement (2007) Slumdog Millionaire (2008) Avatar (2009) The Social Network (2010) The Descendants (2011) Argo (2012) 12 Years a Slave (2013) Boyhood (2014) The Revenant (2015) Moonlight (2016) v t e Golden Globe Award for Best Original Score 1940s Life with Father – Max Steiner (1947) The Red Shoes – Brian Easdale (1948) The Inspector General – Johnny Green (1949) 1950s Sunset Boulevard – Franz Waxman (1950) September Affair – Victor Young (1951) High Noon – Dimitri Tiomkin (1952) On the Beach – Ernest Gold (1959) 1960s The Alamo – Dimitri Tiomkin (1960) The Guns of Navarone – Dimitri Tiomkin (1961) To Kill a Mockingbird – Elmer Bernstein (1962) (1963) The Fall of the Roman Empire – Dimitri Tiomkin (1964) Doctor Zhivago – Maurice Jarre (1965) Hawaii – Elmer Bernstein (1966) Camelot – Frederick Loewe (1967) The Shoes of the Fisherman – Alex North (1968) Butch Cassidy and the Sundance Kid – Burt Bacharach (1969) 1970s Love Story – Francis Lai (1970) Shaft – Isaac Hayes (1971) The Godfather – Nino Rota (1972) Jonathan Livingston Seagull – Neil Diamond (1973) The Little Prince – Alan Jay Lerner, Frederick Loewe (1974) Jaws – John Williams (1975) A Star is Born – Kenneth Ascher, Paul Williams (1976) Star Wars – John Williams (1977) Midnight Express – Giorgio Moroder (1978) Apocalypse Now – Carmine Coppola, Francis Ford Coppola (1979) 1980s The Stunt Man – Dominic Frontiere (1980) (1981) E.T. the Extra-Terrestrial – John Williams (1982) Flashdance – Giorgio Moroder (1983) A Passage to India – Maurice Jarre (1984) Out of Africa – John Barry (1985) The Mission – Ennio Morricone (1986) The Last Emperor – David Byrne, Ryuichi Sakamoto, Cong Su (1987) Gorillas in the Mist – Maurice Jarre (1988) The Little Mermaid – Alan Menken (1989) 1990s The Sheltering Sky – Richard Horowitz, Ryuichi Sakamoto (1990) Beauty and the Beast – Alan Menken (1991) Aladdin – Alan Menken (1992) Heaven & Earth – Kitar? (1993) The Lion King – Hans Zimmer (1994) A Walk in the Clouds – Maurice Jarre (1995) The English Patient – Gabriel Yared (1996) Titanic – James Horner (1997) The Truman Show – Burkhard Dallwitz, Philip Glass (1998) 1900 – Ennio Morricone (1999) 2000s Gladiator – Lisa Gerrard, Hans Zimmer (2000) Moulin Rouge! – Craig Armstrong (2001) Frida – Elliot Goldenthal (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Howard Shore (2003) The Aviator – Howard Shore (2004) Memoirs of a Geisha – John Williams (2005) The Painted Veil – Alexandre Desplat (2006) Atonement – Dario Marianelli (2007) Slumdog Millionaire – A. R. Rahman (2008) Up – Michael Giacchino (2009) 2010s The Social Network – Trent Reznor, Atticus Ross (2010) The Artist – Ludovic Bource (2011) Life of Pi – Mychael Danna (2012) All Is Lost – Alex Ebert (2013) The Theory of Everything – Jóhann Jóhannsson (2014) The Hateful Eight – Ennio Morricone (2015) La La Land – Justin Hurwitz (2016) v t e Hugo Award for Best Dramatic Presentation, Long Form The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004) The Incredibles (2005) Serenity (2006) Pan's Labyrinth (2007) Stardust (2008) WALL-E (2009) Moon (2010) Inception (2011) Game of Thrones (season 1) (2012) The Avengers (2013) Gravity (2014) Guardians of the Galaxy (2015) The Martian (2016) v t e MTV Movie Award for Best Movie Best Movie Terminator 2: Judgment Day (1992) A Few Good Men (1993) Menace II Society (1994) Pulp Fiction (1995) Seven (1996) Scream (1997) Titanic (1998) There's Something About Mary (1999) The Matrix (2000) Gladiator (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2004) Napoleon Dynamite (2005) Wedding Crashers (2006) Pirates of the Caribbean: Dead Man's Chest (2007) Transformers (2008) Twilight (2009) The Twilight Saga: New Moon (2010) The Twilight Saga: Eclipse (2011) Movie of the Year The Twilight Saga: Breaking Dawn – Part 1 (2012) The Avengers (2013) The Hunger Games: Catching Fire (2014) The Fault in Our Stars (2015) Star Wars: The Force Awakens (2016) v t e Nebula Award for Best Script/Ray Bradbury Award Nebula Award for Best Script Soylent Green – Stanley R. Greenberg (1973) Sleeper – Woody Allen (1974) Young Frankenstein – Mel Brooks and Gene Wilder (1975) Star Wars – George Lucas (1977) The Sixth Sense – M. Night Shyamalan (1999) Galaxy Quest – David Howard and Robert Gordon (2000) Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon James Schamus, Kuo Jung Tsai, and Hui-Ling Wang (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, Stephen Sinclair, and Peter Jackson (2003) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King – Fran Walsh, Philippa Boyens, and Peter Jackson (2004) Serenity – Joss Whedon (2005) Howl's Moving Castle – Hayao Miyazaki, Cindy Davis Hewitt, and Donald H. Hewitt (2006) Pan's Labyrinth – Guillermo del Toro (2007) WALL-E – Andrew Stanton, Jim Reardon, and Pete Docter (2008) Ray Bradbury Award for Outstanding Dramatic Presentation Terminator 2: Judgment Day – James Cameron (1992) Babylon 5 – J. Michael Straczynski (1999) 2000X – Tales of the Next Millennia – Yuri Rasovsky and Harlan Ellison (2001) Joss Whedon (2008) District 9 – Neill Blomkamp and Terri Tatchell (2009) Inception – Christopher Nolan (2010) Doctor Who: "The Doctor's Wife" – Richard Clark and Neil Gaiman (2011) Beasts of the Southern Wild – Benh Zeitlin, Lucy Alibar (2012) Gravity – Alfonso Cuarón and Jonás Cuarón (2013) Guardians of the Galaxy – James Gunn and Nicole Perlman (2014) Mad Max: Fury Road – George Miller, Brendan McCarthy and Nico Lathouris (2015) v t e Producers Guild of America Award for Best Theatrical Motion Picture Driving Miss Daisy (1989) Dances with Wolves (1990) The Silence of the Lambs (1991) The Crying Game (1992) Schindler's List (1993) Forrest Gump (1994) Apollo 13 (1995) The English Patient (1996) Titanic (1997) Saving Private Ryan (1998) American Beauty (1999) Gladiator (2000) Moulin Rouge! (2001) Chicago (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) The Aviator (2004) Brokeback Mountain (2005) Little Miss Sunshine (2006) No Country for Old Men (2007) Slumdog Millionaire (2008) The Hurt Locker (2009) The King's Speech (2010) The Artist (2011) Argo (2012) 12 Years a Slave / Gravity (2013) Birdman or (The Unexpected Virtue of Ignorance) (2014) The Big Short (2015) La La Land (2016) v t e Saturn Award for Best Fantasy Film The Golden Voyage of Sinbad (1973) Doc Savage: The Man of Bronze (1974/75) The Holes (1976) Oh, God! (1977) Heaven Can Wait (1978) The Muppet Movie (1979) Somewhere in Time (1980) Raiders of the Lost Ark (1981) The Dark Crystal (1982) Something Wicked This Way Comes (1983) Ghostbusters (1984) Ladyhawke (1985) The Boy Who Could Fly (1986) The Princess Bride (1987) Who Framed Roger Rabbit (1988) Ghost (1989/90) Edward Scissorhands (1991) Aladdin (1992) The Nightmare Before Christmas (1993) Forrest Gump (1994) Babe (1995) Dragonheart (1996) Austin Powers (1997) The Truman Show (1998) Being John Malkovich (1999) Frequency (2000) The Lord of the Rings: The Fellowship of the Ring (2001) The Lord of the Rings: The Two Towers (2002) The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003) Spider-Man 2 (2004) Batman Begins (2005) Superman Returns (2006) Enchanted (2007) The Curious Case of Benjamin Button (2008) Watchmen (2009) Alice in Wonderland (2010) Harry Potter and the Deathly Hallows – Part 2 (2011) Life of Pi (2012) Her (2013) The Hobbit: The Battle of the Five Armies (2014) Cinderella (2015) v t e Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Cast in a Motion Picture (2001–2010) Gosford Park (2001): Eileen Atkins, Bob Balaban, Alan Bates, Charles Dance, Stephen Fry, Michael Gambon, Richard E. Grant, Tom Hollander, Derek Jacobi, Kelly Macdonald, Helen Mirren, Jeremy Northam, Clive Owen, Ryan Phillippe, Maggie Smith, Geraldine Somerville, Kristin Scott Thomas, Sophie Thompson, Emily Watson, James Wilby Chicago (2002): Christine Baranski, Ekaterina Shchelkanova, Taye Diggs, Denise Faye, Colm Feore, Richard Gere, Deidre Goodwin, Queen Latifah, Lucy Liu, Susan Misner, M?a, John C. Reilly, Dominic West, Renée Zellweger, Catherine Zeta-Jones The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King (2003): Sean Astin, Sean Bean, Cate Blanchett, Orlando Bloom, Billy Boyd, Bernard Hill, Ian Holm, Ian McKellen, Dominic Monaghan, Viggo Mortensen, John Noble, Miranda Otto, John Rhys-Davies, Andy Serkis, Liv Tyler, Karl Urban, Hugo Weaving, David Wenham, Elijah Wood Sideways (2004): Thomas Haden Church, Paul Giamatti, Virginia Madsen, Sandra Oh Crash (2005): Christopher "Ludacris" Bridges, Sandra Bullock, Don Cheadle, Matt Dillon, Jennifer Esposito, William Fichtner, Brendan Fraser, Terrence Howard, Thandie Newton, Ryan Phillippe, Larenz Tate Little Miss Sunshine (2006): Alan Arkin, Abigail Breslin, Steve Carell, Toni Collette, Paul Dano, Greg Kinnear No Country for Old Men (2007): Javier Bardem, Josh Brolin, Garret Dillahunt, Tess Harper, Woody Harrelson, Tommy Lee Jones, Kelly Macdonald Slumdog Millionaire (2008): Rubina Ali, Tanay Chheda, Ashutosh Lobo Gajiwala, Azharuddin Mohammed Ismail, Anil Kapoor, Irrfan Khan, Ayush Mahesh Khedekar, Tanvi Ganesh Lonkar, Madhur Mittal, Dev Patel, Freida Pinto Inglourious Basterds (2009): Daniel Brühl, August Diehl, Julie Dreyfus, Michael Fassbender, Sylvester Groth, Jacky Ido, Diane Kruger, Mélanie Laurent, Denis Ménochet, Mike Myers, Brad Pitt, Eli Roth, Til Schweiger, Rod Taylor, Christoph Waltz, Martin Wuttke The King's Speech (2010): Anthony Andrews, Helena Bonham Carter, Jennifer Ehle, Colin Firth, Michael Gambon, Derek Jacobi, Guy Pearce, Geoffrey Rush, Timothy Spall Complete list (1995–2000) (2001–2010) (2011–2020) Authority control GND: 4770274-6